DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA I I SM./O1/251 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION August 13,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject : Tonga-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Tonga, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Tuesday, September 4,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Tonga indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Cardarelli (ext. 38059) and Mr. Nishigaki (ext. 37368). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, August 21,200l; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TONGA Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Article IV Consultation with Tonga Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Michael T. Hadjimichael August lo,2001 l The Article IV consultation discussions were held in Nuku’alofa during June 14-25. The mission comprised Messrs. I. Lee (Head), Cardarelli, and Nishigaki (all APD). Mr. Djojosubroto (OED) participated in the policy discussions. l In concluding the 2000 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors welcomed the acceleration in the pace of economic activity in 1998/99-1999100, but recommended a tightening of monetary and fiscal policies in view of the substantial decline in official reserves. In particular, noting possible shortfalls in government revenue, Directors urged the authorities to contain the civil service wage bill. They also emphasized the need for ongoing structural reforms to promote private sector activity and encouraged early resolution of a problem bank, noting its high level of nonperforming loans. l During 2000/O 1, domestic demand remained unabated, fueled by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The mission assisted the authorities, at their request, in formulating a medium- term adjustment plan focused on restoring tiscal sustainability and a sound monetary policy framework. Financing gaps are projected during 2001/02-2002/03 even with corrective policy adjustments. The mission overlapped with an AsDB mission that discussed details of an Economic and Public Sector Reform Program loan; the first tranche of the loan is expected to be disbursed in the first half of 2002. The stmunin g up of the Article IV consultation will be used to convey to the AsDB the Fund’s views on Tonga’s macroeconomic policy framework. l The mission met with Hon. S.T.T. ‘Utoikamanu, Minister of Finance and Acting Governor of the National Reserve Bank of Tonga (NRBT); Hon. Semisi Sesolo Koka, Minister of Works and Disaster Relief Activities; the deputy governors of the NRBT; other government officials; and representatives of the local business and donor community. l Tonga accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Section 2,3, and 4, on March 22,199l. l Minister ‘Utoikamanu has tentatively agreed to publish the staff report, but will confirm his decision only after the Board discussion. l Mr. I. Lee was the main contributor to this report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. Iv. -2- Contents Page Background .................................................................................................................. 3 Prospects ...................................................................................................................... 6 Policy Discussion ......................................................................................................... 7 A. Policies to Regain Macroeconomic Stability ..................................................... 7 B. Structural Reform to Foster Private Sector Development ............................... 11 Staff Appraisal ........................................................................................................... 14 Boxes 1. Pacific Island Countries: Characteristics and Their Implications for the Economy. ... . 2. Has the Pa’anga Depreciated Too Much? .................................................................. 17 3. External Vulnerability ................................................................................................ 18 4. Proposed Fiscal Measures in 2001/02 and Over the Medium Term.. ....................... .19 5. Proposed Tax and Tariff Reform in Tonga ................................................................ 20 6. Tonga Trust Fund ....................................................................................................... 21 7. Land Regime in Tonga ............................................................................................... 22 Tables 1. Selected Indicators, 1996/97-200 l/O2 ....................................................................... 23 2. Real Sector Developments, 1996/97-200 l/O2 ........................................................... 24 3. Balance of Payments, 1996/97-2000/O 1 .................................................................... 25 4. Monetary Survey, 1996/97-2001/02 .......................................................................... 26 5. Summary Table of Government Operations, 1997/98-2001/02 ................................ 27 6. NRBT Balance Sheet, 1996/97-2001102 ................................................................... 28 7. Selected Indicators for Commercial Banks, 1996-2000 ............................................ 29 8. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999/00-2005/06 .......................................... .30 9. Vulnerability Indicators, 1996/97-2000/01 ............................................................... 31 10. Banking Survey, 1997/98-200 l/O2 ............................................................................ 32 Figures 1. Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/01 ............................................................. 33 2. Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/O 1 ............................................................. 34 3. Recent Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/O 1 ................................................. 35 Annexes I. The Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework.. .................................................... .36 II. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................... 39 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ....................................................................... 40 Iv. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ........................................................... .42 V. Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... 43 VI. Social Indicators ......................................................................................................... 45 VII. Public Information Notice .......................................................................................... 46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. BACKGROUND 1. Tonga is an archipelago, located on the dateline north of New Zealand, comprising 36 inhabited islands scattered over a wide area. With a population of about 100,000, Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which substantial powers are assigned to the King and the royal family; the King appoints the cabinet, headed by a prime minister. Tonga’s economy is based on agriculture (the share of manufacturing is less than 5 percent of GDP) and shares a number of weaknesses with those of other Pacific Island countries (Box 1). Tonga is highly dependent on private transfers from nationals living abroad which, together with tourist receipts, cover about 85 percent of merchandise imports. The government’s share in the economy is large: government spending amounts to about 30 percent of GDP, and the state controls various financial and nonfinancial companies, ranging from a hotel to a fishing company. Box 1. Pacific Island Countries: Characteristics and Their Implications for the Economy I I Characteristics Economic Implications Considerations when Forming Macroeconomic Policies Geographic isolation: national territory Small domestic market, which is Large, one-off transactions affect is normally spread over a large area. separated from the global market by macroeconomic stability. high transportation cost; lack of Ieconomies of scale. I I PAW-ow resource base: dependent on a Cannot spread risk; economy lacks Fiscal revenue and official reserves few sources of income such as grants, diversification and is subject to shocks vulnerable to shocks. workers’ remittances, and tourism. (natural calamities). Cultural characteristics: among other Low financial saving; large subsistence Market not sensitive to marginal policy things, low degree of commercialization; sector; in some countries, foreign adjustments; cultural characteristics need to x~stomary land regime; and close investment is discouraged. be incorporated when designing structural financial family ties. policies. Other Lack of skilled labor and poor infrastructure. Government’s administrative capacity is limited. 2. Real GDP growth, after temporarily strengthening in 1999/00’ to 6 percent, is estimated to have slowed to about 3 percent in 2000/01 (Tables 1 and 2).2 Growth in 1999/00 was supported by a strong rebound in agricultural production, especially root crops and squash, and the services sector, owing to a surge in foreign visitors related to the ’ Fiscal year begins in July. 2 As discussed more fully in Annex V, the quality of economic data in Tonga is subject to important limitations, particularly in the areas of national accounts, government finance, and balance of payments statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- millennium celebration in 1999. Although tourism held up in 2000/01 and construction and government services accelerated, real GDP growth is estimated to have moderated last year due to the low agricultural output growth. 3. The external current account deficit widened further to an estimated 8 percent of GDP in 2000/01, reflecting a deteriorating services balance (Table 3). With a dormant private sector, domestic productive capacity has remained weak. Accordingly, exports have remained flat while merchandise imports, which fell by 4% percent in U.S. dollar terms, still remain high relative to Tonga’s payment capacity. Net service receipts declined further in 2000/O 1, largely because of payments related to Tonga’s airline operation, compounding the sharp decline in recent years caused by a drop in royalties from the lease of Tonga’s satellite space and the closure of a foreign telecommunications company.3 4. Reflecting the large current account deficit, international reserves fell further from US$15% million at end 1999/00 to US$12 million at end 2000/01. The current reserve level represents 1% months of imports, which is about half its level two years ago. In addition, to dampen foreign reserve losses, the National Reserve Bank of Tonga (NRBT) adjusted downward the value of the pa’anga by 21 percent against the U.S. dollar during 2000/01 (or by about 5% percent in real effective terms), compared with a 6% percent depreciation of the composite currency basket! As more than 50 percent of the CPI basket is based on imported commodities, the inflation rate increased further to 7 percent in 2000/01 from 5% percent in 1999/00 (Box 2). 5. Domestic demand in 2000/01 was fueled by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. In particular, the payment of cost of living adjustments (COLA) for civil servants implemented in July 2000 and January 200 1 (10 percent each) maintained the momentum of domestic consumption that started in the wake of the millennium celebration in 1999. The growth in consumption only abated with the sharp Tonga: Domestic Demand, 1996/97-2000/01 In percent OfGDP 00 -- -Aggregate demand 50 - S-I balance (RHS) -1 1996/97 1997/99 1998/99 1999mo 2000/01 currency depreciation noted above that reduced Tonga’s purchasing power. Domestic bank 3 Receipts from the lease of Tonga’s satellite space have declined in recent years due to failure to renew some lease contracts, as well as a diversion of part of its revenue, allegedly, for property acquisition abroad. 4 The composite currency basket comprises the U.S., Australian, and New Zealand dollars and the Japanese yen. The NRBT has the discretion to adjust the value of the pa’anga relative to the basket by up to 5 percent a month fi-om the level of the previous month. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- credit increased by 41 YZ percent in 2000/01, mainly reflecting a large loan for the importation of telecommunications equipment (that is expected to take place in early 2001/02)’ and financial imbalances of some public enterprises (Table 4). 6. Reflecting the COLA adjustments, the overall government deficit for 2000/01 is estimated to have reached 2j% percent of GDP (Table 5). The outturn for total government revenue was about 2 percent of GDP below budget, even though revenue from trade taxes exceeded the budget estimate by %I percent of GDP owing to currency adjustments. On the expenditure side, large payments were made to complete the government’s takeover of a foreign telecommunications company, as well as for a capital injection to an ailing public enterprise. Notwithstanding a substantial compression of nonwage current expenditure, the government had to resort to domestic bank financing equivalent to about 4 percent of GDP. 7. The NRDT is severely constrained in carrying out monetary policy operations. In the absence of budgetary support, its capital base has eroded substantially in recent years with the payment of interest on its short-term paper and lower income from its shrinking foreign exchange holdings. As a result, it was unable to fully absorb excess liquidity in the banking system, nor to remunerate NRBT bills at market rates. In the face of a rise in the reserve requirement from 12 percent to 15 percent in September 2000, banks reduced their holdings of NRBT bills to fund an expansion of credit (Table 6). While the reduction of outstanding NRBT paper has eased the interest expenses of NRBT, it has induced pressures on official foreign reserves. 8. The financial position of banks broadly improved in 2000, except for one bank where little progress was made (Table 7). Pretax profits of two large commercial banks rose further, in part reflecting the reduction in excess liquidity. Also, the Tonga Development Bank (TDB) succeeded in restructuring about T$5 million of its bad loans and recovered T$2.3 million from collateral. TDB’s recent increases in credit were largely attributed to housing and personal loans; there has also been a move toward micro-financing. The ratio of loan loss reserves to total impaired assets of commercial banks increased from 64 percent in 1999 to 87 percent in 2000, mainly due to an increase in specific provisioning by a local subsidiary of a foreign bank that is experiencing financial difficulties. Nevertheless, little progress was made in addressing the nonperforming loans of this bank which, as a ratio to total loans, remained at 40 percent in 2000. 5 A local bank borrowed US$5 million from abroad to extend credit to the domestic company importing the equipment; the NRBT provided cover for the foreign exchange risk effectively at zero cost under political pressures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 11. PROSPECTS 9. Under an adjustment scenario discussed with the authorities, as further elaborated below, real GDP growth in 2001/02 is projected to remain broadly at its current growth rate of about 3 percent. The pressure on official reserves is expected to intensify in the first half of 2001/02 as some government expenditure in 2000/01 was back- loaded and credit expansion to the public sector was concentrated in June 2001. Thus, the envisaged fiscal and monetary tightening is expected to constrain domestic demand only in the second half of 2001/02. In addition, given the large one-off importation of telecommunications equipment noted earlier that will take place during 2001/02, the external current account deficit is expected to remain broadly unchanged at 8 percent of GDP.6 Inflation is expected to moderate, owing to a stable exchange rate and world prices. 10. Over the medium term, potential growth is expected to rise, possibly to about 4 percent, in response to reforms expected to be undertaken (Annex I and Table 8). This projection assumes, in particular, that progress will be made in financial sector restructuring and that a reform of the private sector regulatory environment will be implemented. The outlook also assumes that fiscal measures will be introduced to reduce the overall government deficit to about XI percent of GDP over the next three to four years. The debt-to- GDP ratio would gradually decline, as reliance on external financing is shifted toward non- debt creating capital flows (i.e., foreign direct investment) in response to an improved environment for private sector activity. 11. External vulnerability is expected to decline as the level of official reserves is restored over the medium term in response to fiscal discipline and a sound monetary policy framework (see Section III). Nevertheless, given the small size of the monetized sector, uneven spending patterns of both the public and private sectors could threaten, as in the past, external viability (Box 3). These uneven spending patterns are largely related to activities of a few companies, some of which have strong political connections. External viability could also be threatened by exogenous developments, such as a reduction in workers’ remittances owing to a downturn in the U.S. economy and stricter rules governing foreign workers. Natural calamities, such as prolonged draught, could also affect external viability.7 6 Excluding the large importation of equipment, the external current account deficit is expected to decline by 3% percent of GDP. 7 In the past, agricultural supply shocks arising from cyclones have dampened real GDP growth even though their threat to external viability has been small, as subsistence farmers switched to fast growing crops (e.g., potatoes) rather than resort to imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 111. POLICY DISCUSSION A. Policies to Regain Macroeconomic Stability 12. Because of the precarious foreign reserve position, discussions focused on the policy adjustments that could restore macroeconomic stability. The staff assisted the authorities in formulating an economic program for 2001/02 in the context of a medium-term adjustment plan that would be anchored on strict fiscal and monetary discipline. Informal quarterly targets for 200 l/O2 were established to provide a monitoring framework for macroeconomic developments. In view of the expected foreign exchange outflows during the first half of 200 l/O2 due to precommitted payments, the official reserve target was set to ensure at least 1% months of imports by the end of 200 l/02, which would increase over the medium term to about 3 months of imports. With an overall government deficit target of 2 percent of GDP in 2001/02 and a substantially tightened monetary policy (Table lo), an external financing gap of about 3 percent of GDP (or about US$4% million) was estimated. This gap is expected to be financed by the AsDB under an Economic and Public Sector Reform Program (EPSRP) loan (involving about US$ 10 million to be disbursed over two to three years) linked to the implementation of credible reforms8 While the authorities were relatively confident that the quantitative targets for 2001/02 could be met, the Minister of Finance noted that progress in meeting the medium-term objectives would depend on attaining broader political consensus. Fiscal policy 13. A potential fiscal deficit of 4 percent of GDP for 2001/02 was projected, which is about 2 percent of GDP above the budget estimate. As in previous years, this difference reflected overestimation of revenue from the revolving funds and dividend payments by some public sector companies. In addition, reports from donor countries indicated that grants would be lower than the budget estimate by 3 percent of GDP, which required offsetting adjustments in development expenditure. 14. In view of the large prospective fiscal deficit, the authorities developed measures with the staff that would limit the overall deficit to 2 percent of GDP (Box 4). On the revenue side, the staff proposed the removal of exemptions on the sales tax and on imports of personal and household effects, a tightening of inspections on exemptions under the Industrial Development Incentive (IDI) Act, and efforts to control under-invoicing at customs. These measures would secure roughly two-thirds of the additional revenue targeted ’ Disbursements from AsDB were suspended after 1998 due to a dispute over a power project loan. However, that dispute was resolved in early May 200 1, allowing the AsDB to resume lending activities with Tonga. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- (around 0.8 percent of GDP).’ The remaining one-third would come from an increase in administrative fees and charges, which have been left unchanged for several years. On the expenditure side, it was agreed that savings of 1 percent of GDP could be obtained by freezing the wage bill (especially overtime and daily workers) and renegotiating the payment of interest on pension transfer values.” 15. The authorities were of the view that the additional revenue target for 2001/02 could be met. In respect of the ID1 Act, a committee has been created within the Ministry of Finance to screen current ID1 licensees, and to tighten enforcement of the Act until its expected elimination later in the year. Customs officials have been trained with technical support from AusAID, and a price list would be issued in the near future to counter under- invoicing. The authorities also noted other recently introduced measures that would help improve revenue performance: (i) in 2000, a Revenue Administration Act was passed that combined customs and inland revenue under a single revenue department; and (ii) a draft bill has been prepared to simplify tax legislation and improve the procedures for tax collection.” 16. Over the medium term, the key fiscal challenges for Tonga are to shift the burden of taxation from foreign trade to domestic activity and to reduce the size of the public sector. With the assistance of the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center, the government is in the final stage of preparing a comprehensive tax and tariff reform that is expected to be submitted to parliament by October 2001 (Box 5). Key pillars of the reform are the removal of the extensive array of exemptions, allowances, and loopholes that have resulted in distortions and revenue shortages, and the reduction in the heavy reliance on trade taxation (currently about 50 percent of total revenues). The mission supported the proposed comprehensive tax and tariff changes, and urged the authorities not to further delay these changes, especially given the government’s commitments under its planned accession to the WTO (see paragraph 32 below). 17. Reducing the size of government (and hence its wage bill) to a level more in line with that of neighboring countries will require a comprehensive civil service reform. The staff argued that the civil service has grown to a size which is unnecessarily large and ’ The cabinet has since approved the recommended policy measures on exemptions; the Ministry of Finance is preparing new policy guidelines for the granting of exemptions. lo These pension transfers have arisen as a result of a new retirement fund for civil servants established in July 2000. Until the funds (estimated at T$30 million) are transferred to the new scheme, the pension law prescribes that the government pay interest at a market-related rate. l1 The bill allows the chief commissioner to change an income tax assessment at any time in cases of fi-aud; it also raises penalties for tax arrears and for tax evasion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- very expensive to sustain. Currently, the civil service accounts for about 45 percent of total employment, and wages and salaries represent about 55 percent of government expenditure. The authorities recognized the need for civil service reform, and noted that a reform committee had been established in 2000 with the objective of identifying core and noncore government functions and recommending actions to downsize the civil service. Civil service reform is expected to be a key component of the EPSRP loan of the AsDB noted earlier. 18. The team developed a medium-term scenario to illustrate the impact of the various proposed changes in the tax and tariff system and civil service reform on the size of the overall government deficit (Annex I). Based on this scenario, Tonga would have to abandon its implicit fiscal rule of matching current expenditure and current revenue, and target current surpluses. These surpluses would be needed to maintain an adequate level of capital expenditure, in view of declining foreign financing, and to start paying the unfunded pension liabilities uncovered by the new pension scheme. The authorities agreed to use the mission’s proposed scenario as a framework for evaluating the specific tax and tariff changes that will be developed in the period ahead. 19. The mission recommended that the Tonga Trust Fund (TTF) be consolidated with the budget and its financial statements made public in a timely manner (Box 6). The authorities noted that the TTF could be drawn down to finance specific public projects identified by the Board of Trustees or expenditure designated by the Crown. However, they agreed with the staff that it would be important to maintain the TTF at an adequate level. The staff also recommended that clear rules be established for the investment and drawdown of TTF resources to ensure that there is no further erosion in its capital base and misuse of its resources. The TTF should be used only as a last resort and for short-term lending to the NRBT in the event of severe pressure on official reserves arising from short-term external shocks. The Finance Minister agreed to raise these recommendations with the Trust Fund’s board in the near future. 20. The staff also raised concerns about political interference in the management of the economy. Of particular concern was the lack of transparency in financial transactions involving the public sector and some questionable credit decisions by commercial banks that triggered large loans. Against this background, the staff emphasized the importance of good governance for attaining external viability in the medium term, as well as for regaining stability in the short run. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Monetary and exchange rate policies 21. The staff proposed that the monetary program for 2001/02 be reinforced with an overall bank credit ceiling. l2 The authorities also agreed to limit credit to public enterprises in order to force internal restructuring of problem enterprises, especially as they were not subject to single borrower limits. In addition, with disbursements from the AsDB, the government was expected to reduce its net indebtedness to the banking system to support a strengthening of net international reserves. With these constraints on public sector borrowing, the overall ceiling would allow sufficient credit to the private sector. The staff noted that a credit ceiling would also help prevent one-off, large lending by banks, which in the past had threatened macroeconomic stability. It was agreed that an automatic penalty system for breaches of the credit ceiling be imposed to ensure compliance. 22. The mission recommended that the NRBT use instruments of indirect monetary control to manage liquidity within the agreed credit ceiling, once the cost of monetary policy operations was fiscalized. The Finance Minister agreed to recapitalize the NRBT and to take over the quasi-fiscal cost of executing monetary policy through either an explicit budget allocation or the issue of treasury bills in consultation with the NRBT. In any event, the cost of these operations was not expected to be excessive as the liquidity in the banking system was seen to be relatively tight after the recent wave of credit expansion. (An amount of T$0.3 million was included in the 2001102 fiscal program to cover this cost.) 23. The staff considered that the current exchange rate regime and the level of the nominal exchange rate were broadly appropriate (Box 2). The NRBT staff explained that they used the discretion allowed by the current central bank law to adjust the value of the pa’anga relative to its basket during 2000/01 in order to dampen losses of official reserves in the face of domestic expansionary pressures. The current band of 5 percent was judged to be sufficiently flexible to allow a timely response to future pressures that might arise. The level of official reserves was expected to decline during the first few months of 2001/02 due to precommitted payments of imports. The staff advised that the pa’anga not be adjusted in response to foreign exchange outflows tied to these payments, which were already incorporated in the foreign reserve target of the program. As long as a prudent fiscal and monetary position was maintained, further adjustment beyond movements determined by the currency basket would not be expected to be necessary in the near future. In reviewing the exchange rate system, the authorities also noted that the Foreign Exchange Control Act was i2 The NRBT, assisted by an MAE advisor, has started preparing bank-by-bank credit ceilings, which are expected to be put in place shortly. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- amended last year whereby the authority to approve capital transactions was transferred from the finance ministry to the NRBT, which was better placed to monitor capital flows.t3 B. Structural Reform to Foster Private Sector Development 24. The discussions on medium-term Tonga: Balance of Payments, 1989/99-2000/01 economic reform focused on measures to promote investment and facilitate private 100 sector activities. Unfortunately, Tonga’s foreign exchange-earning capacity has A weakened in recent years, while its 4 dependence on imports remained high. This 2 % 50 weakening stemmed in part from failure to expand its export base, and its inability to i attract foreign direct investment. As such, s agriculture, fishing, and tourism, widely -imports wluding official inflows viewed as sources of Tonga’s comparative -Net current receipts excluding imports 0 advantage, have not been fully exploited.t4 si rj; gj 2 g$p$q~~@g am8 3 m m 0, 8 8 Private sector development 25. The mission strongly advocated a substantial reform of the regulatory environment to promote private sector activity. Private sector representatives with whom the mission met regarded the lack of transparency in government regulations and their implementation as the most serious impediment to private sector development. In particular, the current licensing regime under the ID1 Act was considered to be extremely cumbersome and discriminatory, especially against foreign investors. In this regard, the staff welcomed the proposed elimination of the ID1 Act that would help establish a level playing field, and recommended replacement of the requirements for various business and trade licenses with a system where most companies would only be required to register their businesses. The authorities explained that a joint consultative committee was established in 1998 to promote dialogue between the government and the private sector. While progress has been slow, the development of the AsDB-supported EPSRP was expected to strengthen this dialogue. l3 The amendment also specifies that foreign exchange transactions should be effected through authorized dealers only. l4 The government’s development strategy is expressed in its Seventh Strategic Development Plan, which was approved in May 2001 and establishes prioritized development objectives and polices for the period 2001-2003. The key strategic objectives of the plan are: to develop Tonga’s comparative advantages (fishing, agriculture, and tourism); to rationalize government services; to develop human resources; to maintain physical infrastructure; and to conserve natural resources. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 26. Both the authorities and the representatives of the private sector saw the short duration of land leases and the frequent revision of land rent as major impediments to investment (Box 7). Even if land cannot be sold, it can be leased and used as collateral for mortgage loans. Long-term investment is discouraged, however, by the relatively short duration of a commercial lease (a maximum of 25 years) and the frequent revision of rental contracts (every five years) by the landholder. The staff recommended that the maximum lease period of land for commercial use be extended to at least 50 years and that property rights during the lease period be provided; at the same time, the requirement to renew land rentals every five years should be abolished. The authorities were receptive to these recommendations, but were reluctant to introduce changes in land regulations given the political sensitivity of this issue. 27. Other major obstacles to private sector development are the highly inefficient tax system and the lack of an anti-trust law. In regard to the latter, the staff recommended that the implementation of the competition clause under the current Consumer Protection Act be strengthened to ensure that pricing practices of monopolies and collusive behavior are regulated, and that subsequently an anti-trust law be introduced. The staff also urged that price controls be lifted except where the private sector operates as a monopoly (such as power generation). I5 The authorities argued that before prices could be decontrolled, the regulatory environment would need to be simplified and transparency enhanced to reduce collusive behavior of suppliers. 28. The authorities confirmed their intention to have public corporations facing financial difficulties seek foreign strategic partners, so as to minimize potential fiscal costs and attract new management and technology. Currently there are close to 50 commercial entities controlled by the government, accounting for about 15 percent of total employment. Despite the establishment of the Government Investment Unit in 1999 to monitor state enterprise performance, there is still little reliable information on the financial conditions and profitability of these enterprises, most of which have never paid dividends to the government. The staff welcomed the decision to include within the EPSRP loan the identification of commercial activities for privatization and the adoption of a public enterprise reform strategy. Financial sector issues 29. The mission recommended an early resolution of the problem bank and continued restructuring of TDB to ensure financial system stability. Although the capital of the problem bank was raised by T$l.2 million from the conversion of interbank deposits l5 The only product subject to direct price control is bread. All other controls covering about 20 commodities involve setting limits on pricing margins for imported goods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - into equity, little progress was made toward restructuring its nonperforming loans. An early resolution of this bank would help to mitigate further losses, as well as to minimize the cost of the resolution. NRBT officials concurred with the need to have an early resolution of the problem bank, but noted that, under the present legal framework, any resolution would require intervention by the Supreme Court, which could involve a prolonged legal battle with uncertain outcome. The mission also noted that greater emphasis by TDB on micro-financing was appropriate, although it would need to be closely monitored to prevent creation of future government liabilities. The AsDB is providing technical assistance in TDB’s risk management. 30. The risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio of commercial banks declined to 18.2 percent at end-2000 from 22.5 percent a year earlier. While the ratio is still above the required 15 percent, the staff noted that large and rapid credit expansion that had taken place last year raised some concern as to whether banks assessed their credit risks properly. Given its limited resources, NRBT officials indicated that they were relying on external auditors to verify the financial data for the two large commercial banks (i.e., the use of audit reports by the foreign parent banks) to substantiate the adequacy of loan loss reserves,16 to review the adequacy of internal controls, and to identify any unsafe and unsound practices within the banks. So far, these banks were reported to be in compliance with prudential regulations. 31. The mission endorsed the proposed amendments to the Financial Institutions Act, which are expected to strengthen prudential regulation. These amendments, which are in line with the Basle Committee’s core principles, will also provide the NRBT with a mechanism to enforce prudential regulation, based in part on the imposition of financial penalties. Staffing of the NRBT would need to be given priority, as on- and off-site supervision was still handicapped by a lack of trained inspectors. NRBT officials stated that they have great difficulty in recruiting qualified staff, which impaired not only the central bank’s supervisory capacity, but also its research and operational work. The mission welcomed the repeal of the Offshore Banking Act, which was the basis for Tonga’s inclusion in the OECD list of tax haven countries. Other issues 32. Tonga’s trade regime is relatively open. Although there are six tariff rates (0, 15,20,25,35, and 45), imports of most food items and manufactures fall between rates of 15 and 20. Vehicles (including parts) are subject to a protective rate of 45 percent, while l6 The NRBT introduced new loan classification and provisioning guidelines in November 1998, which provide for a uniform treatment and reporting of loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- cigarettes and liquor are subject to an exceptional tariff rate of 525 percent. In addition, a port and services tax of 20 percent is levied on all imports subject to wide-ranging exemptions. Only eggs are subject to quantitative restriction. The staff welcomed the government’s efforts to join the WT0.17 33. The staff noted the recent improvement in the compilation of BOP statistics and supported the authorities’ intention to improve further the timeliness and frequency of data dissemination. Nevertheless, the staff emphasized that other shortcomings in Tonga’s economic statistics needed to be addressed as a basis for improving policy formulation. For example, two sets of balance of payments estimates provided by the NRBT and the National Statistics Department are significantly different, making a proper assessment of Tonga’s external position difficult. The mission urged the NRBT and the Statistics Department to accelerate their planned production of a uniform set of external accounts in accordance with BPM5 principles. The staff also recommended the preparation of future budget statements in GFS format and the reactivation of the government’s statistics advisory group. For the purpose of ongoing surveillance in-between the annual consultation exercises, the authorities agreed to provide the staff with key monetary and fiscal data on a monthly basis. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 34. Expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in 2000/01 (fiscal year beginning July 1) fueled domestic demand at a time when Tonga’s foreign exchange-earning capacity was already weakening. Real GDP growth declined as the domestic supply response to these policies was limited and the growth in agricultural output slowed. While the depreciation of the pa’anga helped to dampen imports, the external current account deficit still widened, exerting pressure on official foreign reserves. 35. In the wake of these developments, a key challenge in the short term is to regain external viability through fiscal and monetary tightening. During the consultation discussions, the staff assisted the authorities in developing a fiscal and monetary program for 200 l/02 aimed at containing a further drain of official reserves. Early implementation of identified adjustment measures will be critical to the success of the government’s program, especially as the pressure on official reserves is expected to intensify in the coming months. Over the medium term, this restraint needs to be complemented by structural reforms for which a broader political consensus is needed. There is also a need to enhance governance, especially regarding the transparency of certain public transactions that in the past have threatened macroeconomic stability, as well as to strengthen accountability for the use of public resources. l7 Tonga applied for WTO accession in June 1995; the first meeting of the Working Party on Tonga’s accession to the WTO was held on April 26,200l. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 36. Fiscal restraint needs to be given priority in the government’s adjustment effort. The large cost of living adjustments in July 2000 and January 2001 pushed up domestic consumption and widened the external current account deficit, while adding to an already high government wage bill. To limit the overall deficit in 2001/02, it will be necessary for the government to reduce the wage bill through limiting the use of overtime and daily workers, and renegotiate the payment of interest on pension transfer values. Fiscal adjustment should also come from the revenue side, through removing various exemptions and raising administrative fees and charges. 37. The proposed tax and tariff reform will pave the way for shifting the burden of taxation from trade to the domestic economy in future years, but it will need to be accompanied by civil service reform. The proposed tax and tariff changes are welcome steps toward improving fairness and equity of the tax system, and their submission to parliament should not be delayed. Over the medium term, there is a need to target current fiscal surpluses to maintain an adequate level of capital expenditure in view of declining foreign financing. Since the proposed tax and tariff changes could at best be revenue neutral, the staff urges the authorities to cut current expenditure through reducing the size of the government labor force to a level more comparable with that of neighboring countries. However, as civil service reform would require one-off outlays for redundancy payments and retirement packages, the timing and scope of the various tax and tariff changes will need to be phased carefully in order to minimize government deficits in the next few years. 38. The Tonga Trust Fund (TTF) is a valuable public resource that should be consolidated with the budget and its financial statements made public in a timely manner. To enhance transparency in government financial operations, as well as to avoid erosion in its capital base, clear rules should be established for the management of TTF investments. Resources for the TTF should only be used as a last resort, in the form of short- term lending to the National Reserve Bank of Tonga (NRBT) in the event of severe pressures on official reserves arising from short-term external shocks. Full adherence to such rules will be important in confirming the government’s resolve to establish financial accountability. 39. Fiscal tightening needs to be accompanied by a sharp curtailment in bank credit expansion. Since a weak capital base has limited NRBT’s ability to exercise monetary control through indirect instruments, the monetary program for 200 l/O2 should be reinforced with an overall bank credit ceiling. Within the ceiling, the staff sees scope for the NRBT to start using instruments of indirect monetary control to manage liquidity. Once the cost of monetary policy operations is fiscalized, the NRBT could use its own paper or treasury bills for open market-type operations. The improved relationship between the NRBT and the Treasury in recent months will facilitate the use of treasury bills for monetary policy objectives. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 40. The staff considers the current exchange rate and the level of the nominal exchange rate to be broadly appropriate. The present band of 5 percent has been sufficiently flexible in the past to allow the NRBT to respond on a timely basis to balance of payments pressures. While no further adjustment beyond movements in accordance with the currency basket is expected under the authorities’ macroeconomic framework, the NRBT should stand ready to continue to adjust the pa’anga as needed in order to meet its foreign reserve target objectives. 41. Over the medium term, Tonga’s economic success will depend critically on its ability to attract foreign investment and promote private sector activity. The staff urges the authorities to make a start by creating a transparent and clear regulatory environment that would reduce uncertainties to investors, as well as establish a level-playing field. Extending the land lease period and eliminating the reassessment of rent every five years would be particularly important in attracting longer-term investment. Further delay will threaten Tonga’s medium-term external viability. 42. An early resolution of impaired loans in the banking system and continued restructuring of Tonga Development Bank (TDB) is needed to ensure financial system stability. Given that little progress has been made in the resolution of nonperforming loans, official intervention to deal with insolvency in a problem bank will be necessary to mitigate further losses, as well as to minimize the cost of the resolution. Greater emphasis by TDB on micro-financing is appropriate, although it will need to be closely monitored to prevent the creation of future government liabilities. The staff welcomes the expected repeal of the Offshore Banking Act, which would remove Tonga from the OECD list of tax haven countries. 43. Weaknesses in data continue to hamper the timely formulation of policies. In the short run, the duplication of balance of payments statistics should be eliminated. In addition, reactivation of the statistics advisory group would help to coordinate the production of economic statistics within the government and prepare the ground for Tonga’s eventual participation in the GDDS. 44. The next Article IV consultation with Tonga is proposed to take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 2. Tonga: Has the Pa’anga Depreciated Too Much? )uring the fiscal year 2000/01, the pa’anga depreciated by 20.8 percent against the U.S. dollar, and by 14 percent against the composite basket (which includes the U.S. dollar). With n average pass-through rate of 50 percent to the imported component of the CPI, the depreciation has contributed to an increase in the CPI of an estimated 5 percentage points in .OOO/Ol . In real effective terms, the pa’anga depreciated by an estimated 5.6 percent. National Currency per U.S. Dollar June 2000=100 - AUD ----.py 75 1 By comparison with the U.S. dollar, ~ the pa’anga depreciated against the New Zealand and the Australian dollars by 8.4 percent and 7.3 percent, respectively. The depreciation against the U.S. dollar helped to maintain competitiveness relative to Tonga’s neighboring countries. However, even with these recent changes, the pa’anga is still more appreciated in real effective terms than the currencies of Fiji and Kiribati, and at about the same level as that of Samoa relative to the end-June 1997 position. L necessary policy response Real Effective Exchange Rates, 19952001 ‘he depreciation of the pa’anga ias necessary for dampening oreign reserve losses in the wake Nf fiscal and monetary expansion. ‘he strong spending momentum ince the millennium celebration, xacerbated by the recent, large :OLA adjustments and lax nonetary policy, has led to large serves losses since 1998/99. lxchange rate movements have .elped to reduce domestic .emand through the impact of igher prices on real income. 120.0 110.0 100.0 90.0 Vhile changes so far appear to be sufficient, further exchange rate movements may be squired if the fiscal position cannot be contained. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 3. Tonga: External Vulnerability Recent history has shown that the main threat to Tonga’s external stability comes from uneven spending patterns of the private and public sector, rather than from truly exogenous events, such as natural calamities or terms of trade and agriculture supply shocks. The two most recent episodes of reserve erosion (with gross official reserves falling below the policy target of three months of imports) can be attributed to uneven spending pattern/policy mismanagement. The first episode, in 1998, saw official reserves contracting under a dramatic acceleration of private credit growth, mainly reflecting loans to finance a private power project and real estate development. The second episode occurred during1 999-2000 and can again be attributed to an excessively lax Tonga: Gross OtRcisl Reserves, Private Credit Growth sod Trade Deficit 40 - - Private credit, 12 montha pcrm, change (*i!&t-hand side) , monetary policy that allowed private credit to grow at a double-digit rate for most of 1999. The expansionary fiscal stance, reflected in a 10 percent increase in public wages in July 2000 and in January 200 1, contributed to an expansion in the trade deficit and pressures on reserves. ,.” I.” ’ \ 5.0 ,/ \ / \ / \ \ / 0.0 --- 19w95 1595196 1s9m7 1997198 199&39 1959Mw -1.0 xcatl, j n 1995/96, Tonga did not experience any partict farmers switched quickly to fast growing crops. By contrast, two episodes in the second half of the 1990s illustrate the relatively high resilience of Tonga to absorb exogenous shocks. First, Tonga managed to withstand the impact of Cyclone Cora in December 1998 without a real GDP contraction, as the fall in agricultural output was more than offset by an increased production of processed food and building materials. Second, even when the collapse of agricultural (squash) output was not offset by other sectors, as ar problem of external instability as Notwithstanding these experiences in the 199Os, Tonga’s small size and geographical remoteness, the existence of a large informal sector, its heavy reliance on imports, and limited institutional capacity make the economy vulnerable to various external shocks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 4. Tonga: Proposed Fiscal Measures in 2001/02 and Over the Medium Term’ Recommended measures for the 2001/02 budget Reduce the scope of duty exemptions on imports of personal and household effects and improve efficiency of customs duty collection Apply sales tax to all goods imported (removing exemptions on items imported for personal use, building materials, and transactions involving government) Increase fees and charges by 10 percent Cut wages and salaries expenditure Renegotiate the interest rate applied on pension transfer value (from 6 percent to 2 percent) Recommended medium-term adjustments (i.e., 2002/03-2005/06) Revenue Revenue Impact (In T$ millions) 1 .O (0.3 percent of GDP) 1.5 (0.5 percent of GDP) 1 .O (0.3 percent of GDP) 1.5 (0.5 percent of GDP) 1.1 (0.4 percent of GDP) 6.1 (2.1 percent of GDP) Phase out the port and service tax and reduce dispersion of tariff rates while lowering the tariff rate. Compensate revenue loss by broadening the base and raising the rate of sales tax, and by increasing the efficiency of customs duty collection. A possible example of the timing and change of rates implied by these measures is as follows: l Phase out gradually the port and service tax, starting from 2002/03 by cutting the tax rate to 15 percent and ending in 2005/06 with the complete removal of the tax. l Apply a uniform 15 percent tariff rate to all imported goods (removing the exemptions on personal effects and on goods imported under development licenses and by government). An exception is made only for beverages, tobacco, and vehicles, that will continue to be subjected to the current tariff rates. l To compensate for the reduction in revenue from the elimination of the port and service tax, the sales tax rate should be raised from the current 5 percent to 10 percent and extended to services. This measure will cover about 3Y4 of the revenue loss from the elimination of the port and service tax. l Further improve the efficiency of revenue collection (i.e., by ensuring that the duty is paid on the correct value). This measure should cover the remaining I/‘4 of the revenue loss from the elimination of the port and service tax. Expenditure Reduce the number of civil servants by 20 percent (1,200 units) in two years, starting in 2002/03. The wage bill will be higher in these years, as severance payments will offset the reduction in wages and salaries. The wage bill is targeted to fall from the current 15% of GDP to about 12 nercent of GDP bv 2005/06. l! Based on mission recommendations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 5. Tonga: Proposed Tax and Tariff Reform in Tonga IIn 1999, a Tax Policy Committee was established to review various proposals for a reform of the tax system, under the assistance of the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center (PFTAC). After consultations with representatives of the business community and several government departments, a proposal for a comprehensive modification of the current tax and tariff system has been submitted to the cabinet. The main proposed changes are as follows: l Corporate Income Tax: A single, reduced tax rate is to be applied to both nonresidents and residents companies. The proposed rate is 20 percent, well below the current rate of 42.5 percent applied to nonresidents with income above T$lOO,OOO and is equal to the maximum rate applicable to individual income tax. The tax holidays, tax exemptions, and tax credit scheme within the company tax system will be terminated and replaced by investment allowances and deductions for accelerated depreciation. , D Individual Income Tax: A progressive tax rate structure will be introduced with two rates of 10 percent for income below T$S,OOO and 20 percent on the excess. Individuals with less than T$5,000 will be exempted. Currently, incomes above T$2,500 are taxed at a flat rate of 10 percent, with a number of deductions, such as those for each dependent, mortgage repayments, and school fees. Salary and wage earners will be subject to a withholding system which will exempt them from lodging any tax return (unless they have other sources of income), while small individual businesses could apply for presumptive taxation. l Custom Duty: A flat rate of 10 percent is to be applied to all imports except for specific goods such as medicines, travelers’ baggage, fuel for aircraft. This flat rate will replace a wide array of tariff rates currently applied (in the range of O-525 percent), with very high tariff rates (on Tonga. Tax revenue break-up alcohol, tobacco, and (% of total tax revenues) motor vehicles) replaced before the after the by an excise duty. Inputs reform reform Samoa l/ Fiji 11 used for exports will be Income Tax 20 20 22 35 entitled to dutv drawback. Taxes On consumPtion 16 51 59 40 The port and s&-vice tax (currently 20 percent) will be abolished. Taxes on h l/Figures : taxes and VAT .ade 64 29 18 from the 2000/01 budget; taxes on consumption are excise 25 l Sales Tax: A 15 percent rate (instead of the current 5 percent) will be applied to all imported goods (including those for personal use, currently exempted) and to local production and service provision by large businesses (with annual turnover above T$l ,OOO,OOO for manufacturers and T$ 100,000 for services). Hence, services would become subject to the sales tax, with only a few exceptions (i.e., medical care, education, financial services, electricity, and public transportation). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 6. Tonga Trust Fund The Tonga Trust Fund (TTF) is a public sector fund, maintained separately from the budget and the official international reserves. It was established in 1989 from the proceeds of sales of Tongan passports to foreigners. It subsequently also received part of the revenue from the lease of Tongan satellite space for a few years. Resources of the TTF are invested offshore, in both financial (equity and bonds) and real estates instruments. It is managed by a Board of Trustees, chaired by the Prime Minister. Financial statements for the Fund are published only with a long lag (the latest statement is for the fiscal year 1997/98). At the end of 1999/00, the balance of the Fund was estimated at about US$37 million (book value). The Fund can only be used to finance specific capital investments or expenditure for the Crown. Best international practice: Several countries have established off-budget funds, typically to receive inflows from exports of nonrenewable resources. The objectives of these funds are: l to stabilize the economy through reducing the volatility of fiscal revenue. Two well-known cases of stabilization funds are the Copper Stabilization Fund of Chile and the Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund of Venezuela. In the Pacific area, Kiribati and Papua New Guinea have established funds that manage revenues from mining resources; l to store wealthfirfuture generations; this is the main goal of Kuwait’s Reserve Fund for Future Generations, and of Norway’s State Petroleum Fund. The establishment of these funds poses several problems of governance, transparency, and accountability. On these issues, best international practice can be summarized as follows:’ l these funds should be clearly integrated into the budget process to ensure that fiscal policy is formulated on the basis of a consolidated government financial position; l transfers to these funds should be included in the budget; l these funds should have a clear asset management strategy and guidelines; l the rules and operations of these funds should be transparent and Ii-ee from political interference, with regular and frequent reporting of inflows and outflows, the asset allocation, and the return on investment. Staff recommendation on the TTF: On the basis of the above-mentioned best practice and of the volatility of Tongan economy, the mission recommended that: l the TTF should be used as a stabilization-type fund, in particular as a last resort that could be accessed in the event of severe pressures on reserves arising from short-term external shocks; l clear rules and guidelines for its investment should be established; and l the TTF should be consolidated with the budget and its financial statements made public in a timely manner. ’ See Stabilization and Saving Funds for Nonrenewable Resources, IMF Occasional Paper No. 205 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, 2001). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 7. Tonga: Land Regime in Tonga The key features of the customary land regime in Tonga are as follows: Land belongs to the ‘Kiugdom” and, for management purposes, is divided into 42 estates, which are distributed mainly according to hereditary principles and as government assets. Not all estates are equal in size; the estate assigned to the government (and managed by the Ministry of Land) accounts for about 35 percent of the total. The estate holders (including the Ring) cannot sell land. They are obliged to distribute the land among the people: every Tongan male from the age of 16 is entitled to an allotment of certain dimensions, where he and his heirs can live and/or farm. Ninety-five percent of the land attributed to the estate holders is to be distributed as hereditary allotments to Tongans, and only the remaining 5 percent can be leased. However, due to a growing population, an increasing number of Tongans are losing their right to an allotment. Any individual can have a maximum of 3 hereditary allotments and 10 leasehold allotments. The lease can be formally registered or can be customary (a simple agreement between two individuals). When registered, all leases must go through the Ministry of Land, which reviews the application for a lease before submission to the cabinet for approval. Rejections must be motivated by the social and financial conditions of the applicant, and are not very frequent. Leases can have different terms depending on whether they are for commercial or non- commercial reasons. The duration of a commercial lease is normally 25 years, which may become 99 years if the lease involves the government. Rent is reassessed every five years. The short duration of the lease and the frequent revision of rent are considered as two of the major land-related obstacles to FDI and to the development of a private sector in Tonga. The land held under lease can be used as a collateral for mortgage. In case of failure to repay the loan, the bank takes over the lease for the residual life of the mortgage and can sub- lease the land. A lease can only be terminated before its expiration date if the rent is not paid or if there has been a change in the usage of land (from commercial to residential use or vice versa). The government has already assigned 80 percent of its estate, and thus has only limited scope for leasing land to commercial projects. An alternative to the leasing of the land is creating an “industrial estate.” Under such an arrangement, the government can lease manufacturing facilities to the private sector. All land 50 feet from the water is part of the government estate, and can be leased in principle for tourism facilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1, Tonga: Selected Indicators, 1996/97-2001/02 l/ Nomiual GDP (2000/01): US% 132.4 million Population (2000): 100,281 GDP per capita (2000/01): US% 1,320 Quota SDR 6.9 million 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 Est. 2000/01 Proj. 2001/02 2/ Output and prices Real GDP Consumer prices (period average) -0.1 1.6 2.0 3.0 central gove-nt 6uauce Revenue Grants Current expenditure Development cxpenditore Overall balance External loans (net) Tonga Trust Fund drawings Domestic bank financing Financing gap 29.5 28.8 1.9 1.6 28.1 29.3 8.1 4.6 -4.8 -2.5 -0.1 1.5 0.5 2.4 0.s -0.2 . . . . . . Money and credit (end-period) 3/ Broad money (M2) Private sector credit 14.1 2.1 11.5 20.8 Balance of payments Exports, f.o.b. Jmports, f.o.b. Services and income (net) Transfers (net) Current account balance (Iu percent of GDP) Overall balance 13.2 11.9 12.1 10.9 11.3 12.0 -60.2 -78.1 -55.5 -62.6 -59.9 -64.7 8.1 8.6 7.2 1.1 -5.3 -2.5 37.3 39.4 35.3 40.5 42.4 43.9 -1.6 -18.2 -1.0 -10.1 -11.6 -11.3 -0.9 -11.2 -0.6 -6.3 -8.1 -8.0 2.1 -12.2 7.2 -5.9 -3.6 -2.3 Gross intematioual reserves (end-period) In millions of U.S. dollars In months of following year’s imports of goods and services 26.2 14.2 3.2 2.4 External debt External debt/GDP 35.6 36.3 Debt-service ratio 4/ 10.7 8.2 Exchange rate (period average) Pa’auga per U.S. dollar (end-period) Pa’auga per U.S. dollar Real effective exchange rate (1990=100) Nominal effective exchange rate (1990=100) 1.25 1.50 1.23 1.35 109.6 111.9 101.5 102.5 (Percent change) 3.1 6.2 3.9 5.3 (Jn percent of GDP) 26.1 26.9 0.5 0.4 26.7 27.0 1.3 1.3 -0.2 -0.4 1.4 1.2 0.1 0.4 -0.3 0.3 . . . . . (Percent change) 15.3 8.3 2.4 7.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 21.4 15.6 3.3 2.3 w PeEat) 43.9 40.7 4.0 12.1 1.59 1.69 1.58 1.64 101.1 103.0 90.3 90.0 3.0 7.0 26.8 1.1 27.3 1.3 -2.6 -0.9 0.1 3.7 35.8 5.7 26.4 13.1 12.0 1.7 40.5 14.5 2.15 1.95 . . 9.7 1.5 45.5 6.6 2.09 2.09 . . 2.9 3.5 27.8 1.4 27.6 3.1 -2.0 -0.1 0.0 0.0 2.1 Sowces: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Fiscal year begins in July. 2/ Gove-nt finance data for 2001/02 are staff estimates reflecting the staffs policy recommen dations. 3/Does not include Tonga Development Bank. 4/ Ju percent of exports of goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-24- Table 2. Tonga: Real Sector Developments, 1996/97-2001/02 (Percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated) 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999lOO Est. Proj. 2000/o 1 2001/02 GDP (1995/96 prices) Of which : Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries Manufacturing Construction Commerce, restaurants, and hotels Transportation and communications Finance and real estate Government services GDP (by sector; current prices) Of which : Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries Manufacturing Construction Commerce, restaurants, and hotels Transportation and communications Finance and real estate Government services Consumer prices (period average) All items Domestic component Imported component l/ Memorandum item: Nominal GDP (in millions of pa’anga) 210.2 218.9 237.3 261.1 277.1 Nominal GNP (in millions of pa’anga) 21 257.7 290.6 320.0 352.2 394.6 -0.1 3.8 -0.1 0.3 11.4 -17.2 5.9 -5.5 2.3 0.8 2.9 6.6 14.5 4.9 0.3 24.2 25.7 26.4 26.6 25.4 3.9 4.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 5.2 5.3 5.5 5.3 5.5 12.0 11.9 10.8 12.0 11.6 7.2 7.0 7.2 6.8 7.0 7.5 8.4 8.7 8.6 8.7 15.2 14.9 15.5 14.5 15.7 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.6 3.0 7.7 -1.0 3.1 6.2 -3.1 10.8 16.4 0.7 10.5 -1.7 -6.0 17.9 11.7 4.4 7.4 5.6 8.9 -1.3 (Percent of total) 3.9 5.3 5.9 -0.7 2.1 11.1 3.0 1.3 2.0 9.0 -2.0 4.7 2.0 10.0 7.0 6.4 7.5 2.9 2.0 4.0 4.0 2.0 4.5 2.0 4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.5 5.0 2.2 295.2 419.1 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ The increase in 1999/00 reflects a 20 percent upward adjustment of tobacco prices. 21 The large difference between GNP and GDP reflects workers remittances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. Tonga: Balance of Payments, 1996/97-2000/O 1 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1996197 1997198 1998199 Prel. Est. 1999100 2000/o 1 Trade balance -47.0 -66.2 -43.5 -51.7 -48.6 Exports, f.o.b. 13.2 11.9 12.1 10.9 11.3 Imports, f.o.b. -60.2 -78.1 -55.5 -62.6 -59.9 Services (net) 6.6 6.9 4.3 1.9 -4.5 Receipts 31.2 27.8 18.7 18.3 15.4 Payments -24.6 -21.0 -14.4 -16.4 -19.8 Income (net) 1.5 1.7 2.9 -0.8 -0.9 Receipts 2.6 4.8 4.0 1.9 1.7 Payments -1.1 -3.0 -1.1 -2.6 -2.6 Current transfers (net) 37.3 39.4 35.3 40.5 42.4 Official transfers (net) 0.5 0.6 1.4 0.1 0.3 Private transfers (net) l/ 36.8 38.8 33.9 40.4 42.1 Current account balance (Percent of GDP) Capital account balance Official capital (net) Official loans, net Others, net Private capital (net) -1.6 -18.2 -1.0 -10.1 -11.6 (-0.9) (-11.2) (-0.6) (-6.3) (-8.1) 5.9 7.1 9.0 2.6 3.9 5.1 6.7 4.2 3.1 3.7 -0.2 2.5 2.1 1.9 -1.3 5.2 4.2 2.1 1.2 5.0 0.9 0.4 4.8 -0.6 0.2 Errors and omissions -2.3 -1.0 -0.8 1.6 4.1 Overall balance 2/ 2.1 -12.2 7.2 -5.9 -3.6 Memorandum items: Net official foreign reserves Gross official foreign reserves In months of following year’s imports of goods and services 26.1 13.9 21.1 15.3 11.7 26.2 14.2 21.4 15.6 12.0 3.2 2.4 3.3 2.3 1.7 Exchange rate Pa’anga per U.S. dollar (period average) 1.23 1.35 1.58 1.64 1.95 Pa’anga per U.S. dollar (end-period) 1.25 1.50 1.59 1.69 2.15 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes some misclassification of travel receipts and exports. 21 Change in net official foreign reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 4. Tonga: Monetary Survey, 1996/97-200 l/O2 l/ 1996197 1997198 1998/99 1999100 Est. 2000/o 1 Proj. 2001/02 Net foreign assets 33.0 16.4 34.4 26.9 25.1 19.7 Gross international reserves 37.8 26.1 39.7 32.0 39.1 28.3 Foreign liabilities -4.9 -9.7 -5.3 -5.1 -14.0 -10.0 Net domestic assets 43.2 61.4 55.3 70.4 106.9 119.8 Domestic credit 69.8 84.2 85.0 92.5 130.9 141.9 Central government (net) 2.4 2.0 0.7 0.8 10.2 6.9 Public enterprises 0.4 0.6 1.5 2.3 8.4 8.4 Private sector 65.3 78.9 80.8 86.5 109.3 123.6 Other financial institutions 1.8 2.7 2.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 Other items (net) -26.6 -22.8 -29.7 -22.1 -24.0 -22.1 Broad money (M2) 76.2 77.8 89.7 97.3 132.0 139.5 Narrow money 20.9 21.3 24.7 27.9 31.3 33.3 Quasi-money 55.3 56.5 65.0 69.4 100.7 106.2 Net foreign assets 10.8 -50.2 109.6 -21.9 -6.5 -21.6 Net domestic assets 16.8 42.1 -9.9 27.4 51.8 12.1 Domestic credit 14.7 20.5 1.0 8.8 41.5 8.4 Central government (net) 266.6 -16.8 -64.6 -43.4 1,203.O -32.4 Private sector 11.5 20.8 2.4 7.0 26.4 13.1 Broad money (M2) 14.1 2.1 15.3 8.3 35.7 5.7 Narrow money 2.4 1.8 16.0 12.8 12.2 6.4 Quasi-money 19.3 2.3 15.0 6.7 45.2 5.5 Net foreign assets 4.8 -21.7 23.1 -8.4 -1.8 -4.1 Net domestic assets 9.3 23.9 -7.8 16.7 37.5 9.8 Domestic credit 13.4 18.8 1.1 7.6 39.4 8.3 Central government (net) 2.6 -0.5 -1.6 -0.7 9.7 -2.5 Private sector 10.1 17.8 2.5 6.3 23.5 10.8 Other items (net) -4.1 5.1 -8.9 9.1 -1.9 1.5 Memorandum items: Velocity (GDP/average stock of M2) 2/ Velocity (GDP/average stock of Ml) Nominal GDP (pa’anga nut.) Average stock of M2 (pa’anga mn.) 2/ Average stock of Ml (pa’anga mn.) 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.5 2.5 10.1 10.4 10.3 9.9 9.4 9.4 207.8 218.9 237.3 261.1 277.1 295.2 71.5 77.0 83.8 93.5 109.6 116.8 20.7 21.1 23.0 26.3 29.6 31.5 (In millions of pa’anga; end-period) (12 month percent change) (Contribution to 12 month change in M2; in percent) Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Excludes the Tonga Development Bank. 2/ Excludes a telecomunications loan of T$ 10 million in 2000/O 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-27 - Table 5. Tonga: Summary Table of Government Operations, 1997/g&2001/02 Years ending June 30 1991198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 Budget Bat. Budget Pmjectbn Total rewmue and grants 66.6 63.3 71.3 87.2 71.5 98.1 82.7 86.2 Total revenue 63.0 62.1 70.2 78.9 74.3 85.5 78.5 82.0 current revenue 63.0 62.1 70.2 78.5 74.3 85.1 78.2 81.7 Tax revenue 43.9 47.1 52.6 53.9 54.0 58.1 58.4 60.9 Trade taxes 27.6 29.7 34.2 34.4 35.4 37.3 38.6 39.6 other taxes 16.2 17.4 18.4 19.5 18.6 20.8 19.8 21.3 Nontax revenue 19.1 14.9 17.6 24.6 20.3 27.0 19.8 20.8 Of which: Revolving funds 3.6 1.9 3.1 8.9 2.6 8.0 3.0 3.0 Capital revenue 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.4 Grants (in cash) 3.5 1.3 1.1 8.3 3.1 13.2 4.2 4.2 Total expenditure and lending minus repayments 72.0 63.9 12.2 93.9 84.7 105.4 94.6 92.0 Total expenditure 14.3 66.6 13.9 95.4 19.2 98.1 94.2 91.7 Current expenditure 64.2 63.4 70.6 11.2 15.6 85.4 83.0 81.6 Wages and salaries 33.0 35.4 37.0 44.0 43.3 41.2 47.2 45.8 Other cuuent expenditures 31.2 28.0 33.5 33.3 32.3 38.2 35.8 35.8 Additional expenditures 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.2 0.0 1.6 2.0 0.9 Capital expenditure 10.1 3.2 3.3 15.9 3.6 11.1 9.2 9.2 Total lending minus repayments -2.3 -2.1 -1.7 -1.5 5.5 1.3 0.3 0.3 Overall deficithplus -5.4 -0.6 -1 .o -6.1 -7.3 -6.1 -11.8 -5.8 Total financing ExteNal fimciug Disbursements Repayments Domestic hancing Tonga Trust Fund Discrepancy Financing gap 5.4 0.6 1.0 6.1 1.3 3.4 3.4 3.1 1.0 -2.6 6.0 4.9 5.1 10.1 3.7 2.6 1.5 2.6 9.1 6.3 -0.4 -0.6 0.8 0.0 10.3 5.3 0.3 1.0 1.3 0.2 -2.8 -2.5 -3.9 4.4 -0.6 6.1 -0.4 3.0 3.4 0.0 7.1 11.8 5.8 -0.2 -0.2 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.3 0.0 0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0 . . . . . . 12.1 6.1 (In percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants 30.4 26.1 21.3 31.5 28.0 33.4 28.0 29.2 Total revenue 28.8 26.1 26.9 28.5 26.8 29.0 26.6 27.8 Current revenue 28.8 26.1 26.9 28.3 26.8 28.8 26.5 21.7 Taxwenue 20.0 19.9 20.1 19.4 19.5 19.7 19.8 20.6 Trade taxes 12.6 12.5 13.1 12.4 12.8 12.6 13.1 13.4 otiler taxes 1.4 1.3 7.0 7.0 6.1 7.1 6.1 1.2 Nontax revenue 8.7 6.3 6.1 8.9 7.3 9.1 6.1 7.0 Of which: Revolving funds 1.6 0.8 1.4 3.2 0.9 2.1 1.0 1.0 Capital revenue 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 Grants 1.6 0.5 0.4 3.0 1.1 4.5 1.4 1.4 Total expenditure and lending minus repayments Total expenditure current expenditure Wages and salaries 0th expenditures Additional expenditures Capital expenditure Total lending minus repayments Overall deficithplus Total financing External financing Disbursements Repayments Domestic bank fiuancing Tonga Trust Fund Discrepancy Finaucing gap 32.9 34.0 29.3 15.1 14.3 0.0 4.6 -1.1 -2.5 26.9 21.1 28.1 28.3 26.1 27.0 14.9 14.2 11.8 12.8 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 -1.1 -0.6 -0.2 -0.4 33.9 30.6 34.4 28.6 21.9 27.3 15.9 15.6 12.0 11.7 0.8 0.0 5.1 1.3 -0.5 2.0 -2.4 -2.6 32.0 31.2 31.9 31.1 28.1 21.6 16.0 15.5 12.1 12.1 0.7 0.3 3.1 3.1 0.1 0.1 4.0 -2.0 2.5 0.2 1.5 1.4 2.8 2.0 1.2 0.6 -0.2 -0.3 2.4 0.1 -1.3 -1.1 2.4 2.6 0.4 -0.9 3.7 1.3 3.3 2.3 0.0 3.1 0.5 0.1 1.6 -0.2 35.1 33.2 28.9 16.0 12.9 0.5 3.8 2.5 -2.3 2.3 -0.1 1.0 1.2 0.0 . . . . . . 0.4 1.2 2.2 1.0 0.3 0.4 -1.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0 4.0 -0.1 1.0 1.1 0.0 . . . . . . 4.1 2.0 -0.1 1.0 1.1 0.0 . . . . . . 2.1 (Jn millions of pa’anga) Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fuud staff estimates. l! As agreed with the authorities, it includes a m01e realistic revenue projection and a corresponding adjustment on the expenditure side. 21 Assumes fiscal measures reflecting the withdrawn of custom duty and sale tax exemptions, an increase in fees and charges, a reduction in wages and salaries and a reduction in interests paid on pension transfer value baaed on sta& policy recommen dations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28- Table 6. Tonga: NRBT Balance Sheet, 1996/97-2001/02 (In millions of pa’anga; end-period) 1996197 1997198 1998/99 1999100 Est. 2000/01 Proj. 11 2001/02 Net foreign assets Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Net domestic assets Claims on central government (net) Other items (net) Of which: NRBT notes Capital and reserves 2/ Reserve money Currency issued Banks’ deposits at NRBT Of which: Required reserve Memorandum items: Net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Money multipliers 3141 Narrow money Broad money 32.6 20.9 33.7 25.8 25.2 19.9 32.8 21.3 34.1 26.2 25.8 20.3 -0.2 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.6 -0.4 -11.8 -1.0 -11.8 -0.1 6.6 10.9 5.0 2.7 -0.1 0.2 4.9 1.6 -16.9 -3.7 -11.7 -0.3 1.7 9.3 -26.5 -2.5 20.8 19.9 8.2 8.2 12.6 11.6 8.6 9.1 26.1 13.9 1.0 3.7 -13.5 -1.7 1.1 3.9 -20.2 -1.1 -9.3 -1.0 0.0 -1.0 . . . . . . 21.9 25.7 31.8 30.8 9.3 10.2 11.9 . . . 12.6 15.4 19.8 . . . 11.6 12.5 18.2 . . . 21.1 1.1 4.1 15.3 11.7 1.1 3.8 1.1 4.2 9.3 1.1 4.5 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Staff projection reflecting the staffs policy recommendations. 2/ Capital and reserves amounted to T$3 million in 1995/96. 31 Defined as money divided by reserve money. 4/ Excludes a telecomunications loan of T$ 10 million in 2000/O 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 7. Tonga: Selected Indicators for Commercial Banks, 1996-2000 (In millions of pa’anga, unless otherwise indicated) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Total assets Of which : Lmms and advances to nonfinancial institutions Capital 27.9 27.5 26.0 20.5 21.4 Capital adequacy ratio (in percent) Total capital/total assets Risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio Asset quality (in percent) Loan loss reserves/total loans Total impaired assets/total loans Loan loss reserves/total impaired assets Liquidity ratio (in percent) Net loans/deposits Liquid assets/total assets Earnings (in percent) Pretax profits/avemge assets Operating income/average assets Operating expenses/average assets Net interest income 4.8 5.4 6.0 6.5 7.5 Net non-interest income -0.9 -0.6 0.3 1.1 1.7 Total operating pmfits 3.9 4.7 6.3 7.6 9.2 In U.S. dollars 3.2 3.8 4.2 4.8 5.4 119.6 128.0 144.1 145.3 182.6 56.2 67.6 80.4 85.0 100.9 23.4 21.5 . . . . . . 5.5 4.0 3.8 4.4 5.0 8.1 4.8 6.7 6.9 5.7 67.9 83.3 56.7 63.8 87.2 11 68.6 80.7 86.2 82.2 82.9 44.0 40.2 38.6 36.1 39.8 2.0 2.1 3.7 4.7 5.2 9.0 8.8 9.2 9.6 10.4 5.4 5.6 4.6 4.8 4.6 (End of period) 18.0 14.1 11.7 . . . 22.5 18.2 Source: Data provided by the Tongan authorities. 11 Reflects mainly the additional specific provisioning of a bank in order to comply with the NRBT’s prudential regulation on credit risk grading and asset quality. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 8. Tonga: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999/O&2005/06 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Prel. Est. 1999100 2000/01 2001/02 Projections 2002103 2003104 2004105 2005/06 Trade balance -51.7 -48.6 -52.8 -45.7 -47.2 -50.2 -52.5 Exports, f.o.b. 10.9 11.3 12.0 13.9 15.9 17.0 18.2 Imports, f.o.b. -62.6 -59.9 -64.7 -59.6 -63.1 -67.3 -70.7 Services (net) 1.9 -4.5 -1.9 -1.9 -1.1 -0.2 1.0 Receipts 18.3 15.4 16.3 16.8 18.2 19.7 21.4 Payments -16.4 -19.8 -18.1 -18.7 -19.3 -19.9 -20.4 Income (net) -0.8 -0.9 -0.6 -0.2 -0.6 -0.4 -0.7 Receipts 1.9 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.0 2.1 1.9 Payments -2.6 -2.6 -2.5 -2.4 -2.6 -2.5 -2.6 Current transfers (net) 40.5 42.4 43.9 44.0 44.7 45.4 46.1 Offkial transfers (net) 0.1 0.3 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 Private transfers (net) l! 40.4 42.1 42.3 42.3 43.1 43.8 44.5 Current account balance 2/ -10.1 -11.6 -11.3 -3.9 -4.2 -5.4 -6.1 (Percent of GDP) -6.3 -8.1 -8.0 -2.6 -2.6 -3.2 -3.3 Capital account balance 2.6 3.9 9.1 Official capital (net) 3.1 3.7 8.3 Private capital (net) -0.6 0.2 0.8 Basic balance -7.5 Errors and omissions 1.6 Overall balance 3/ -5.9 Memorandum items: Net official foreign reserves Gross official foreign reserves In months of following year’s imports 15.3 11.7 15.6 12.0 -7.7 4.1 -3.6 8.1 8.4 8.4 1.5 1.4 1.4 6.6 7.0 7.0 -2.3 0.0 -2.3 9.2 4.5 4.7 5.3 0.0 5.3 3.9 2.9 2.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.9 2.9 2.2 9.5 9.7 14 14.8 18.6 21.6 23.8 15.0 18.9 21.9 24.1 2.3 1.7 ..” -.- 73 2.6 2.9 3.0 of goods and services Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes some misclassification of travel receipts and exports. 2/ Reflects growing imports associated with larger foreign investment inflows over the medium term. 31 Change in net official foreign reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 9. Tonga: Vulnerability Indicators, 1996/97-2000/01 (As percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Est. 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 Financial sector risk indicators Public and public goaranteed debt Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis) Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis) Share of deposits in bmad money (percent) Sham of foreign currency deposits in total deposits (percent) External indicators Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) Terms of trade (percent change, 12 month basis) Current account balance Capital and Gnancial account balance Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollas) Central bank foreign liabilities (in millions of U.S. dollars) Central bank foreign currency exposure 11 Foreign assets of commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign liabilities of commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign currency exposure of commem ial banks l/ Gross official international reserves (as percent of imports of goods and services) Gross official international reserves (as percent of broad money) Short-term debt Short-term debt to gmss official international reserves Total external debt Total external debt (as percent of exports of goods and services) Debt-service ratio (as percent of exports goods and services) Extemal interest payments (as percent of exports goods snd services) External amortization payments (as percent of exports goods and services) Exchange rate (pa’anga per U.S. dollar, end of period) 42.7 42.6 49.2 47.5 51.2 14.1 2.1 15.3 8.3 35.7 11.5 20.8 2.4 7.0 26.4 91.7 92.2 91.8 91.7 91.7 6.8 3.8 4.7 4.1 4.1 3.9 -9.8 1.5 -9.5 3.2 -9.5 29.7 -28.9 12.7 -4.3 -18.2 -30.0 16.1 11.6 -1.7 -0.9 -11.2 -0.6 -6.3 -8.1 3.5 4.3 6.0 1.6 1.1 26.2 14.2 21.4 15.6 12.0 -0.2 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 0.6 1.9 1.3 1.7 2.5 4.0 3.2 3.5 3.4 6.2 -3.8 -6.9 -3.1 -2.8 -6.8 -92.9 -192.8 -86.5 -81.4 -100.4 25.3 10.6 19.4 12.0 7.7 34.4 18.2 23.9 16.0 9.1 0.8 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 5.0 7.1 4.7 6.4 8.3 35.6 36.3 43.9 40.7 40.5 137.4 150.1 216.4 213.0 215.9 10.7 8.2 4.0 12.1 14.5 2.4 2.1 1.1 3.0 2.4 8.3 6.1 3.0 9.1 12.1 1.25 1.50 1.59 1.69 2.15 Sources: Data pmvided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/Foreign currency exposure is defined to be fore& liabilities as a percentage of foreign assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 10. Tonga: Banking Survey, 1997/98-2001/02 l/ (In millions of pa’anga; end-period) 1996197 1997198 1998/99 1999/00 Est. 2000/01 Proj. 21 2001/02 Net foreign assets 33.0 16.4 34.4 26.9 25.1 19.7 Net official reserves 32.6 20.9 33.7 25.8 25.2 19.9 Cross official reserves 32.8 21.3 34.1 26.2 25.8 20.3 Net foreign assets held by banks 0.4 -4.5 0.8 1.1 -0.1 -0.2 Long-term foreign liabilities 3/ -4.0 -3.4 -3.5 -3.8 -3.0 -3.0 Net domestic assets 65.6 83.8 71.1 92.4 127.1 137.0 Domestic credits 108.9 124.8 117.2 123.4 162.8 173.8 Central government (net) 0.5 0.1 -1.2 -0.7 9.6 6.3 Public enterprises 2.9 1.8 2.4 3.4 8.4 8.4 Private sector 105.6 122.9 116.0 120.7 144.8 159.1 Other items (net) -43.3 -41.0 -46.1 -31.0 -35.7 -36.8 Total liquidity 76.7 79.5 88.2 Broad money 73.6 75.2 83.5 Money 18.3 18.7 18.4 Quasi money 55.3 56.5 65.0 Notes and bills 41 3.1 4.3 4.7 Government lending funds 5/ 17.8 17.4 13.9 100.6 135.4 142.9 94.0 128.8 136.3 24.7 28.1 . . . 69.4 100.7 . . . 6.6 6.6 6.6 14.8 13.8 13.8 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Consolidated balance sheet of National Reserve Bank of Tonga, commercial banks, and Tonga Development Bank. 2/ Staff projection reflecting the staffs policy recommendations. 3/ Direct external borrowing by Tonga Development Bank. 4/ Comprises bills and promissory notes issued by financial institutions held outside the banking sector. 5/ External borrowing by government which was on lent to Tonga Development Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33- FIGURE 1 Tonga: Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/01 l/ 8 - 8 Growth 7 - (Annual percent change) 7 6 - 6 0 0 -1 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 50 Monetary Developments 45 -(12-month percent change) 20 - 15 - 10 - 5 - /’ 0 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 40 35 30 25 Central Government Budget (In percent of GDP) 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 40 35 30 25 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fiscal year ending June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public60 50 40 30 20 10 0 45 30 15 0 -15 -30 -45 -34- FIGURE 2 Tonga: Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/01 l/ 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/o 1 c3 External (% GDP, LHS) msli Domestic (% GDP, LHS) -Total Debt (USS mn., RHS) 1 Balance of Payments 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 I 0 Trade Balance = Transfers, net EIZZ Services, net -Current Account I 80 70 60 45 30 15 0 -15 -30 -45 120 115 110 105 100 95 90 85 80 75 70 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates. l! Fiscal year ending June. 2/ An increase indicates an appreciation of the pa’anga. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - FIGURE 3 Tonga: Recent Economic Developments, 1995/96-2000/O 1 12 10 8 6 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Inflation 12 (12-month percent change) I’. I I ’ Imported / ‘, component ! \ : \ \ 8 Local component I -\ I 6 - 4 - 2 - 0 ’ / I - -2 ‘/ ‘-4 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 10 koss Official Reserves Millions of U.S. dollars (left scale) 3 Months of following year’s imports of goods and services (right scale) 6 4 0 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 1 Monetary Developments 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 7 - 6 - 5 deposit rate (right scale) - 4 Credit to the i private sector I ,,( 12-month percent I 1 vhange, left scale) I I / \ I \ \ \ \ /’ /’ \ \ I I \ \ I I \ \ \ \ \ \ 1’ 1’ \ /’ \ /’ L’ L’ - 3 - 2 - 1 - 0 - -1 ’ -2 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 E xtemal Developments (1 n millions of U.S. dollars) Tourism receipts sEoA/------ ---_ ---_ --- -w// //---- 50 50 40 30 20 10 0 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX I Tonga: The Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework Baseline Outlook The medium-term macroeconomic scenario assumes that progress is made in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector and creating an environment conducive to the development of the private sector. Accordingly, real GDP growth is expected to reach 4 percent in the medium term, as the reforms would attract investments in fisheries, agriculture, and tourism. After reaching 7 percent in 2000/01, inflation is expected to moderate to about 3 percent, with a stable exchange rate and world prices. Increased foreign direct investment and moderated domestic consumption are expected to contribute to a recovery in the level of official reserves, eventually to about 3 months of imports. Although larger fore&n investment will be accompanied by higher imports, the external current account deficit is expected to be contained to about 3 percent of GDP as exports and tourism receipts will take off in response to new investments. The scenario assumes external official financing of US$7.5 million (US$4.5 million and US$3 million for 2001/02 and 2002/03, respectively) in addition to normal project-related financing. Over the medium term, external debt ratios will decline as borrowing is replaced increasingly by investment inflows. The medium-term outlook is underpinned by fiscal discipline that limits the overall government deficit to below l/2 of GDP. The evolution of revenue reflects the implementation of the tax reform presented in the text (Box 5). The port and service tax is phased out in five years, with its rate (currently 20 percent) reduced by 5 percent every year starting from 2002/03. Initially, the loss of revenue from the phased elimination of the port and service tax will be more than offset by an improved administration of customs duty collection and an expanded sales tax base. Eventually, revenue as a percentage of GDP will be slightly below the current level as the port and service tax is fully eliminated. The adoption of a simple tariff rate at 15 percent and the abolition of all current exemptions are expected to be revenue neutral. On the expenditure side, a civil service reform is assumed to start in 2002/03, with the retrenchment of 20 percent (around 1,100 workers) over three years. The retrenchment cost is estimated using the average pension payment (around T$22,000) per worker during the last year. Because of the cost of retrenchment, current expenditure as a percentage of GDP is expected to increase initially, but then fall significantly by the end of the policy horizon. Capital expenditure is assumed to be maintained at 3 percent of GDP for the whole period, as more effort is devoted to developing the capital infrastructure needed for the acceleration of economic growth. The social cost of retrenchment is expected to be modest given the Tonga’s generous pension benefits, the close family ties that provide an informal social safety net, access to subsistence farming, and the expected pickup in private sector activity over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX I Alternative Scenario Without the reforms discussed above, investment would not take place and GDP growth would remain, as in the past, at about 2 percent. In the absence of civil service reform, and with the elimination of the port and service tax (which is required for Tonga’s accession to the WTO), the overall fiscal deficit would widen to about 4-5 percent of GDP over the projection period. Since external financing would not be possible, the government would have to resort to domestic bank financing. Accordingly, the external current account deficit would widen to about 4 percent of GDP and official reserves would be subject to intense pressure, and would not be able to recover to the desired level of 3 months of imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX I Tonga: Baseline Medium-Term Scenario, 1999/00-2005/06 1999/00 Est. 2000/01 2001/02 Projection 2002103 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 Output aud prices (Percent change) Real GDP 6.2 3.0 2.9 3.3 Con-r prices (period average) I/ 5.3 7.0 3.5 3.1 3.5 3.9 4.0 3.2 3.2 3.2 Saving and investment Consumption Investment 1/ Gross domestic saving Overall deficit 120.5 126.1 10.7 11.3 -30.5 -39.3 -1.0 -6.7 (In percent of GDP) 131.9 124.8 122.7 121.1 118.4 6.9 6.8 7.3 8.2 9.5 -43.1 -35.9 -33.1 -30.8 -27.4 -7.3 -5.8 -0.9 -1.0 -1.0 Central gave-nt finance Revenue 2131 Current expenditure Development expenditure Overall deficit Balance of payments Exports, f.o.b. hports, f.o.b. Services and income (net) Transfers (net) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Net offkial capital flow Net private capital flow Overall balance 26.9 26.8 27.8 31.1 30.0 27.7 26.2 27.0 27.3 27.6 29.0 27.9 25.6 23.9 1.3 1.3 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 -0.4 -2.6 -2.0 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 10.9 11.3 -62.6 -59.9 1.1 -5.3 40.5 42.4 -10.1 -11.6 (-6.3) (-8.1) 3.1 3.7 -0.6 0.2 -5.9 -3.6 (Jn millions of U.S. dollars) 12.0 13.9 15.9 -64.7 -59.6 -63.1 -2.5 -2.1 -1.7 43.9 44.0 44.7 -11.3 -3.9 -4.2 (-8.0) (-2.6) (-2.6) 8.3 4.5 1.5 0.8 4.7 6.6 -2.3 5.3 3.9 17.0 18.2 -67.3 -70.7 -0.6 0.3 45.4 46.1 -5.4 -6.1 (-3.2) (-3.3) 1.4 1.4 7.0 7.0 2.9 2.2 Gross international reserves (end-period) Jn millions of U.S. dollars 15.6 12.0 9.7 15.0 18.9 21.9 24.1 In months of following year’s imports of goods and services 2.3 1.7 1.5 2.2 2.6 2.9 3.0 External debt @percent) External debt/GDP 40.7 40.5 45.5 44.1 40.9 37.7 34.7 Debt-service ratio 4/ 12.1 14.5 6.6 9.8 8.1 7.7 7.2 Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund starTestimates. l/Includes grants-in-kind, which amounted to about 7-8 percent of GDP in recent years. 2/Assumes rationalization of the tax and trade system, including elimination of port and services tax over the next five years. The resulting revenue loss is expected to be partly compensated by broadened tax base. 3/Excludes grants. ~/III percent of exports of goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. Ix. X. - 39 - Tonga: Fund Relations (As of June 30,200l) Membership Status: Joined g/13/85; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 6.90 Total holdings of currency 5.20 Reserve position in Fund 1.71 SDR Department SDR Million Holdings 0.13 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangement: ANNEX II % Quota 100.0 75.3 24.8 % Allocation n.a. Since February 11,1991, the pa’anga has been pegged to a weighted basket of currencies comprising the U.S., the Australian, and the New Zealand dollar, with the U.S. dollar as the intervention currency. From July 2000, the basket started to include the Japanese yen, and the limit on exchange rate adjustments was raised to 5 percent a month from 2 percent that had prevailed since March 1998, when the allowance for adjustment was introduced. Last Article IV Consultation: Staff discussions were held during August 2 l-3 1,200O and the Executive Board discussed the staff report (SM/00/246, 10/3 l/00) on November 20,200O. Technical Assistance: PFTAC has provided assistance on budgetary management; tax administration; banking legislation and supervision; and balance of payments and national accounts statistics. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX III Tonga: Relations with the World Bank Group’ (As of July 200 1) Tonga joined the World Bank Group in 1985. An IDA credit of US$2 million, cofinanced by the Asian Development Bank (AsDB), was approved on June 2,1987 for the Tonga Development Bank (TDB). The credit was designed to provide the TDB with long-term resources to meet investment demand-particularly in agriculture, industry, and tourism-as well as to support institutional development. A second TDB credit of US$3 million was approved on January 4, 1990, which was also cofinanced by the AsDB, to support interest rate reform as well as to provide financing for projects in the agricultural, industrial, and tourism sectors. A grant of US$250,000 was approved in 1996 to support the government’s efforts in the medium term to improve and expand telecommunication facilities. A grant of US$lOO,OOO was approved in 1999 to support Y2K planning. The Bank’s fourth biennial Regional Economic Report for its Pacific Island member countries, including Tonga, was issued in November 2000. This report, ‘Cities, Seas and Storms: Managing Change in Paczjk Island Economies, ’ aims to help the people and governments of the Pacific islands deal proactively with some of the major challenges and opportunities confronting them in the beginning of the twenty-first century. It focuses particularly on three areas: the growth of urban areas, the use of the ocean, and the impact of and adaptation to climate change. In addition, country reports on Tonga have been prepared as part of the Bank’s Pacific regional studies on post-secondary education, energy, health, and transportation. A public expenditure review was completed in 1997. A mission from the World Bank visited Tonga in April 2001 to discuss with the authorities possible bank support in the areas of public sector reform, and in the finance, health, and agricultural sectors. These discussions are continuing. IFC has provided support to Tonga through its Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) and through the South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF), which provides small business advisory services to Pacific island member countries. In 2000, FIAS completed a report on regulatory modernization including drafting guidelines and undertook an investment incentives review. SPPF has previously provided project support in the fisheries and agribusiness sectors. Recent reports: . Pacific Island Economies, Building a Resilient Economic Base for the Twenty-First Century, 1996 . Tonga: Public Expenditure Review, 1997 . Enhancing the Role of Government in the Pacific Island Economies, 1998 . Cities, Seas, and Storms: Managing Change in Pacific Island Economies, 2000 ‘Prepared by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTotal disbursed Undisbursed IFC investments -4l- ANNEX III World Bank Group Credits (In millions of U.S. dollars) 4.34 0.00 None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX IV Tonga: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ (As of July 2001) The Asian Development Bank’s operational strategy for Tonga focuses on improving financial and economic management, and supporting private sector and outer islands development. The Bank has approved 14 loans totaling $47.8 million from the ADF to Tonga since it joined the Bank in 1972. The most recent loan to the power sector was approved in December 1996, but was cancelled by the Bank in 1998 due to failure to become effective. Of the 14 loans, project completion reports have been prepared for 13 projects, 8 of which have been post-evaluated. Currently, there is only one loan in the portfolio. This is the Outer Islands Agriculture Development Project, which was approved in December 1995. The project is proceeding well, but some key issues remain outstanding. The Bank requested a close follow-up of these issues on a monthly basis. Technical assistance grants totaling $11.1 million have been provided for 45 projects since 1972. Five capacity-building technical assistance projects are associated to three above- mentioned loans. Most of the projects are completed or nearing completion. The performance under most projects is considered satisfactory. This assistance is focused on macroeconomic and fiscal management, trade promotion, pricing policy for physical infrastructure, as well as institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Agriculture and SSFCL. Planned technical assistance will assist the government in implementing economic and public sector reforms, including efforts to streamline and improve the efficiency of the public sector. In the future, policy dialogue will focus on supporting implementation of the govemment- proposed Economic and Public Sector Reform Program (EPSRP). The objective of the proposed EPSRP is to enhance private sector-led economic growth by: (a) promoting policies that create a conducive environment for increased investment and employment by the private sector; and (b) improving the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery by the public sector. The Bank would support the formulation and implementation of the EPSRP by providing Technical Assistance (TA), and then a program loan. Tonga: Loan and Technical Assistance Approvals, 1996-2000 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Loan approvals Number 1 0 0 0 0 Amount (in millions of U.S. dollars) 5 0 0 0 0 Technical assistance approvals Number 2 1 1 0 2 Amount (in millions of U.S. dollars) 0.9 0.3 0.4 0 0.3 ’ Prepared by Asian Development Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - ANNEX V Tonga: Statistical Issues Tonga publishes a range of macroeconomic statistics on a regular basis. The two main sources of statistical information are the Quarterly Bulletin of the National Reserve Bank of Tonga (NRBT), and the annual Ministry of Finance (MOF) budget documents. The authorities report to the Fund the core indicators associated with national accounts, official balance of payments, and government finance with long lags. In recent years, the Statistics Department/MOF has received regular technical assistance in national accounts, government finance, and balance of payments statistics from Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC). In addition, an STA technical assistance mission on government finance statistics was fielded in February 2000. Nonetheless, due to the scarcity of human and financial resources, as well as inadequate coordination among statistical agencies, important data weaknesses remain, particularly in national accounts, government finance, and balance of payments statistics. The national accounts data comprise mainly a gross domestic product (GDP), estimated from the production side. Only a very rough estimate is available on the breakdown of GDP into expenditure components. The Statistics Department recently published revised estimates of GDP for 1993/94 to 1998/99 and provisional estimates for 1999/00, with a new base period (1995/96). The rebasing was undertaken with the support of technical assistance experts from the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Secretariat for the Pacific Community. The mission assessed the new GDP estimates. The current CPI (November 1995 = 100) is based on an updated basket of goods derived from the 1992/93 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. A labor force survey and the decennial population census were undertaken in 1996. A regular presentation of government finance statistics according to the GFS methodology is lacking. The GFS mission of February 2000 prepared bridge tables linking the government chart of accounts and GFS classification categories, and compiled government finance data in GFS format for 1997/98.The MOF used these tables to provide the 2001 Article IV mission with revenues and expenditures data in GFS format for the 1998/99-2000/01 period. The mission recommended that financing and debt data also be compiled in GFS format. The MOF intends to generate monthly fiscal data according to GFS methodology from its new automated accounting system. Published data are available only annually and are not widely disseminated, and revisions are large. The official balance of payments figures are compiled by the Statistics Department with long lags and only on an annual basis; monthly trade figures derived from customs documents are available with a three-month lag. The NRBT compiles unofficial monthly balance of payments statistics based on the foreign exchange records of the banking system with a six- week lag. The figures from both agencies show significant differences. Furthermore, efforts are made to improve the coordination between the NRBT and the Statistics Department as to produce more timely and reliable balance of payment data. Technical assistance is being provided from the PFTAC to encourage improvement in the basic data sources, particularly the Overseas Exchange Transactions recording system. The MOF has put in place a system which provides detailed information on external debt disbursements and service. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX V Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEX VI Tonga: Social Indicators Latest Single Year Same Region/Income Group 1970-75 1980-85 1993-99 East Lower- Asia and Middle- Pacific Income Population Total population, midyear (millions) 0.1 0.1 0.1 1,836.6 2,093.o Growth rate (percent, annual average) 0.9 0.2 0.5 1.2 1.1 Urban population (percent of population) 24.3 29.9 37.4 34.5 42.9 Total fertility rate (births per woman) . . . 4.4 3.8 2.1 2.1 Income GNP per capita (in U.S. dollars) Consumer price index (1995=100) Food price index (1995=100) . . . 750 17 51 . . . . . . 1,730 114 . . . 1,010 1,200 136 137 . . . . . . Public expenditure Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GNP) Social security and welfare (percent of GDP) . . . . . . . . . 4.1 . . . 0.5 . . . . . . . . . 1.7 2.3 2.9 4.8 . . . . . . Access to safe water (Percent of population) Total Urban Rural . . . 95 100 75 80 . . . 100 93 94 . . . 100 66 69 Immunization rate (Percent under 12 months) Measles DPT 81 97 83 87 92 94 82 87 Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female . . . 65 71 69 69 63 69 67 67 67 73 71 72 Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (15-59) ... 33 ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 35 32 24 44 40 Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) 183 184 191 128 141 133 Source: 2001 World Development Indicators, World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX VII Public Information Notice (PIN) No. Ol/-- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [September 4, 20011 International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Tonga On [August 29, 20011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Tonga.’ Background Real GDP growth, after temporarily strengthening in 1999/00 to 6 percent, is estimated to have slowed to about 3 percent in 2000/01 (fiscal year beginning July 1). Growth in 1999/00 was supported by a strong rebound in agricultural production, especially root crops and squash, and the services sector owing to a surge in foreign visitors related to the millennium celebration in 1999. Although tourism has since held up in 2000/01 and construction and government services have accelerated, real GDP growth is estimated at about 3 percent due to the low agricultural output growth from a buoyant base year. The external current account deficit has widened further to an estimated 8 percent of GDP in 2000/01, reflecting limited supply response to strong demand and a deteriorating services balance. Exports have remained flat while merchandise imports, which have fallen by 4% percent in U.S. dollar terms, still remain high relative to Tonga’s payment capacity. Net service receipts fell further in 2000/01 reflecting payments related to Tonga’s airline operation. Accordingly, international reserves fell from US$l% million at end 1999/00 to US$12 million at the end of 2000/01, the equivalent of 1% months of imports, which is less than half the level two years ago. In addition, to dampen foreign reserves losses, the National Reserve Bank of Tonga adjusted downward the value of the pa’anga by 21 percent l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the September 4, 2001 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX VII against the U.S. dollar during 2000/01 (or by about 5% percent in real effective terms) compared with a 6% percent depreciation of the composite currency basket. As more than 50 percent of the CPI basket is based on imported commodities, the inflation rate increased further to 7 percent in 2000/01, from 5% percent in 1999/00. Domestic demand in 2000/01 was fueled by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The overall fiscal deficit for 2000/01 is estimated at 2% percent of GDP, reflecting the payment of cost of living adjustments (COLA) for civil servants in July 2000 and January 2001 (10 percent each) and lower than budgeted revenue collections of about 2% percent of GDP. Notwithstanding a substantial compression of nonwage current expenditure, the government had to resort to domestic bank financing of about 4 percent of GDP. Despite a rise in the reserve requirement from 12 percent to 15 percent in September 2000, excess liquidity, coupled with the low interest paid on NRBT short-term bills, facilitated strong credit expansion by banks. Accordingly, domestic credit expanded by 41.5 percent, reflecting a large loan for importation of telecommunications equipment (that is likely to take place in early 2001/02) and rapid credit expansion to public enterprises. The financial position of banks broadly improved in 2000, except for one problem bank where little progress was made. The Tonga Development Bank (TDB) succeeded in restructuring about T$5 million of its bad loans and recovered T$2.3 million from collateral. The TDB has recently shifted its loan portfolio toward a more commercial basis and micro- financing. The ratio of loan loss reserves to total impaired assets of the commercial banks increased from 64 percent in 1999 to 87 percent in 2000, due to an increase in specific provisioning of T$0.8 million by the problem bank. Nevertheless, little progress was made by the bank in addressing its nonperforming loans which, as a ratio to total loans, have remained at 40 percent in 2000. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEX VII Tonga: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997/98-2000/01 I/ 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 Output and prices Real GDP Consumer prices (period average) Central government finance Revenue Grants Current expenditure Development expenditure Overall balance External loans (net) Tonga Trust Fund drawings Domestic financing Money and credit (end-period) 2/ Broad money (M2) Private sector credit Balance of payments Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Overall balance Gross international reserves (end-period) In millions of US dollars In months of following year’s imports of goods and services External debt External debt/GDP Debt-service ratio (in percent of export of goods and services) Exchange rate (period average) Pa’anga per US. dollar Real effective exchange rate (1990=100) -0.1 2.0 1.6 3.1 3.0 3.9 (In percent of GDP) 6.2 3.0 5.3 7.0 29.5 28.8 26.1 26.9 26.8 1.9 1.6 0.5 0.4 1.1 28.1 29.3 26.7 27.0 27.3 8.1 4.6 1.3 1.3 1.3 -4.8 -2.5 -0.2 -0.4 -2.6 -0.1 1.5 1.4 1.2 -0.9 0.5 2.4 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.8 -0.2 -0.3 0.3 3.7 (Percent change) 14.1 2.1 15.3 8.3 35.7 11.5 20.8 2.4 7.0 26.4 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 13.2 11.9 12.1 10.9 11.3 -60.2 -78.1 -55.5 -62.6 -59.9 -1.6 -18.2 -1.0 -10.1 -11.6 ’ -0.9 -11.2 -0.6 -6.3 -8.1 2.1 -12.2 7.2 -5.9 -3.6 26.2 3.2 14.2 21.4 2.4 3.3 (In percent) 15.6 2.3 35.6 36.3 43.9 40.7 10.7 8.2 4.0 12.1 1.23 1.35 1.58 1.64 109.6 111.9 101.1 103.0 12.0 1.7 40.5 14.5 1.95 . . . (Percent change) Sources: Data provided by the Tongan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Data are for July-June fiscal years. 2000/01 data are preliminary. 21 Does not include Tonga Development Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public