DOCUMENT OF MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/02/64 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February 2 1,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Swaziland-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Swaziland, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, March 11,2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Swaziland indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Tsibouris (ext. 35632) and Mr. Vocke (ext. 38472). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat Friday, March 1,2002; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SWAZILAND Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with Swaziland Approved by Michael Nowak and Leslie Lipschitz February 20,2002 l Discussions were held in Mbabane during November 27-December 12, 2001. The staff team comprised Mr. Tsibouris (head), Mr. Erasmus, Mr. Leite, Mr. Vocke (all AFR), and Mr. Hatch (TRE). l The Swazi representatives included Dr. Barnabas Dlamini, Prime Minister; Mr. Majozi V. Sithole, Minister for Finance; Prince G. Guduza Dlamini, Minister for Economic Planning and Development; Mr. Martin G. Dlamini, Governor of the Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS); Mrs. Musa D. Fakudze, Principal Secretary for Finance; Mr. Ephraim M. Hlophe, Principal Secretary for Economic Planning and Development; other senior officials; and representatives of private financial institutions and the business community. l Swaziland has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. l Swaziland has no outstanding use of Fund resources. l Relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively; periodicity and timeliness of the principal economic statistics are presented in Appendix III; selected social and demographic indicators are shown in Appendix IV; and a draft background section for the Public Information Notice is provided in Appendix V. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary ..,................,....,............................,..............,........,..................................... 4 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Economic Developments . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..6 III. Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 A. Background .......................................................................................................... -10 B. Medium-Term Setting ........................................................................................... 10 C. Medium-Term Outlook ........................................................................................ .12 D. Fiscal Policy.. ....................................................................................................... .12 E. Banking Sector and External Policies .................................................................. .14 F. Structural Reforms ................................................................................................. 17 G. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................... .2 1 Iv. Staff Appraisal . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 1 Boxes 1. Developments in Competitiveness.. .............................................................................. .9 2. The New SACU Agreement ....................................................................................... .l 1 3. The Banking System in Swaziland ............................................................................. .15 4. Land Tenure Policy.. ................................................................................................... .19 5. The National Response to HIV/AIDS.. ....................................................................... .20 Figures 1. 2. 3. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators .............................................................. .30 Exchange Rate Developments and Inflation, 1993-O 1 ............................................... .3 1 Money Growth and Interest Rates, 1993-O 1.. ............................................................ ..3 2 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-O 1 ............................................. ..2 4 Summary of Central Government Operations, 1997/98-2002/03 .............................. .25 Balance of Payments, 1996-O 1 .................................................................................... 26 Monetary Survey, 1996-O 1 .......................................................................................... 27 Medium-Term Scenarios, 2000-06 ............................................................................. .28 Indicators of External Vulnerability.. .......................................................................... .29 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Contents Page Appendices I. II. III. Iv. V. Relations with the Fund .............................................................................................. .33 Relations with the World Bank Group ......................................................................... 35 Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 36 Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................... 39 Draft Background Section for Public Information Notice .......................................... .40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Executive Summary l Swaziland’s economic performance deteriorated in the latter half of the 1990s: the current account balance turned negative due to sluggish export growth; foreign direct investment dwindled due to both political changes at the regional level and investor concerns locally; and the fiscal balance moved to a deficit position due mainly to increases in current spending. As a consequence, real GDP growth has slowed, reaching an estimated 1 l/2 percent in 200 1, while consumer inflation accelerated to over 10 percent by end-2001. The international reserve position remains reasonably comfortable with relatively low external debt-service obligations. l Against this background, the authorities have been taking a number of corrective policy actions, including changes in tax policy and a strengthening of banking supervision and central bank independence. Nevertheless, there is a need to step up reform efforts to achieve significant gains in per capita income and employment and tight widespread poverty and HIV infection. l In boosting the economy’s growth potential while averting unsustainable financial imbalances, there is a need to strengthen public finances in order to create a more conducive investment environment and improve the delivery of social services. This could be accomplished by reducing the level of budgetary outlays as a share of GDP while re-orienting both current and capital spending towards the health and education sectors; expanding the tax base to compensate for the projected reductions in trade taxes; and reducing the use of tax concessions. In addition, a careful sequencing of the government’s civil service reform will be critical and the public enterprise sector needs to enhance its efficiency and reduce its dependence on budgetary resources. l While the vulnerability of the banking system has declined, the Swaziland Development and Savings Bank remains a source of concern; its close supervision will need to continue now that it has relaunched its operations. With Swaziland moving to full capital integration within the Common Monetary Area, the authorities will also need to further reduce the interest rate differentials with South Africa. l Structural reform efforts aimed at strengthening land tenure arrangements will have an important effect on economic growth as they will lead to enhanced investment in the important agricultural sector. l There is a continuing need to improve the timeliness and comprehensiveness of economic data for the purposes of economic policy making and effective surveillance. In this context, the authorities were encouraged to participate in the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The Executive Board concluded the 2000 Article IV consultation on July 19,200O (SM/00/132; 6/26/00). Directors stressed the importance of pressing forward with reforms, particularly in the fiscal, banking, and structural areas. Directors emphasized that the required fiscal consolidation would need to center on expanding both the direct and indirect tax bases, strengthening tax enforcement, and curtailing the large government wage bill through a rationalization of the pay scale and a restructuring and downsizing of the civil service. They agreed that, within a constrained expenditure envelope, increased budgetary allocations would need to be accorded to health and education. Directors also reiterated concerns about the persistent weaknesses in Swaziland’s banking system and urged the authorities to implement actions to enhance the regulatory framework for bank supervision, to increase the capital adequacy of banks, and to restructure and privatize the large and insolvent Swaziland Development and Savings Bank (SDSB). Directors emphasized the need to accelerate the pace of structural reforms relating to land tenure, the restructuring and privatization of additional public enterprises, and the implementation of labor-management conciliation mechanisms. 2. Swaziland’s socioeconomic performance deteriorated in the latter half of the 199Os, both in absolute terms and relative to the comparator group of lower middle-income (LMI) countries, due in part to a slowdown in economic growth and the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic (see table below).’ In trying to reinvigorate economic growth, policymakers continue to contend with difficult challenges: (i) a severely skewed income distribution and widespread poverty;’ (ii) a relatively young population and a formal sector unemployment rate of approximately 25 percent, concentrated among the young; and (iii) an HIV/AIDS crisis, with the incidence of HIV infection estimated at just over 25 percent of the working-age (ages 15-49) population (second only to Botswana). 3. There has been some progress both in terms of constitutional reform and labor market conciliation mechanisms. After five years of deliberation, the Constitutional Review Commission (CRC) released its report in November 200 1 .3 The report recommends, inter alia, that the monarch’s power be extended and that Swazi citizenship become more difficult to attain. While the report has drawn a somewhat measured reaction by the press and l The World Bank lists Swaziland as a lower middle-income country (given its per capita GNP of US$1,350). On the basis of a human development index of 0.583, Swaziland is ranked as a middle-tier human development country by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2 Swaziland has the highest Gini coefficient among all LMI countries, with an estimated two-thirds of the population living on less than US$l per day. 3 The CRC was established in 1996 to address concerns about governance and to propose a new constitution. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Swaziland: Socioeconomic Performance, 1990-99 Gini Coeff. l/ Swaziland 60.9 LMI countries 31 42.9 GDP growth rate GNP Per Capita (real, annual Human Development (current, U.S. dollars) percent change) Index 21 1990 1995 1999 1990-94 1995-99 1990 1995 1999 1,200 1,380 1,350 3.9 2.9 0.611 0.615 0.583 920 1,010 1,200 1.8 4.2 0.668 0.688 0.710 Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2001; UNDP, Human Development Report, 2001; staff calculations. l/ Index of income inequality-a higher value indicates greater inequality. The data for Swaziland are for 1994, and the data for LMI countries are the latest observations available, typically in the latter half of the 1990s. 21 Aggregate index of GDP per capita, life expectancy, adult literacy, and school enrollment; a higher value indicates more progress in human development. 3/ Lower middle-income countries; World Bank analytical classification. pressure including from the International Labor Organization, several controversial clauses of the Industrial Relations Act, which aims to provide mechanisms for speedy resolution of labor relation conflicts, were amended by end-2000.4 II. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 4. Economic growth has slowed, while inflationary pressures have picked up. Driven by lower export activity, real GDP growth is estimated to have declined to 2% percent in 2000 and further to about 1% percent in 2001 (Table 1 and Figure 1). In addition to two consecutive disappointing sugar harvests and a related slowdown in agro-processing, several large industrial enterprises closed down owing to the adverse economic environment. Swaziland’s preferential access to U.S. markets under the U.S. African Growth and Opportunity Act has led to the start- up of some new enterprises in the 41 Re&GDP Growth (Icft scale) -A 14.0" 12.00 6.00 F g 4.00 CPI (12~month; right scale) ! 2.00 0 0.00 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 4 These controversial clauses included the imposition of restrictions to workers’ freedom of association and assembly, as well as a clause that made workers responsible for any damage or loss of business income caused as a result of strikes. These clauses have since been removed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- garment sector since early 2001. However, the unemployment rate has remained at high levels of about 25 percent of the labor force. Consumer price inflation, which had been declining through January 2001, rose to just over 10 percent by end-2001 (see figure above), following the pass-through of the depreciation of the lilangeni, shortages of maize, and increased demand pressures on nontradable goods. 5. The public finances have deteriorated steadily over the past few years. After several years of fiscal surpluses, the fiscal balance moved into a deficit position of about 1 Y&2 percent of GDP in the period 1999/2000-2000/01 (April-March). Taking into account the recently approved supplementary budget, the fiscal position is estimated to deteriorate further to a deficit of almost 4 percent of GDP in 2001/02 (Table 2). This deterioration reflects smaller tax collections (see below) and a steady 35 34 increase in recurrent expenditure as a share of GDP, of which about half is the public sector wage bill (which remains among the highest, as a share of GDP, in southern Africa).’ Inefficiencies in the capital budgeting process have led to a recurrence of underspending of the capital budget, thereby effectively keeping actual fiscal deficits below budgeted levels. The fiscal deficit was financed entirely from domestic nonbank (including the provident and public pension funds) and foreign sources; government debt amounted to an estimated 25 percent of GDP at end-2001. 6. The partial passage of the amendments to the Income Tax Act in 2001 has led to a decline in tax collections. While the income tax rate reductions were approved, many of the intended base-broadening measures (except the elimination of the income tax exemption for public enterprises and the introduction 8 ,. of withholding taxes on management fees 7.5 and royalties) did not pass the legislative process. The authorities estimate that the 7 c approved amendments led to a net reduction s 6.5 % in tax receipts of about 1 percent of GDP in $ 6 2001/02. $ 5.5 : 7. The decline in budgetary outlays on health and education has placed 4.5 ‘lr 1994195 1995196 1996197 1997198 1998199 19YYlOO 2000l0l Fiscal year 5 Civil servants constitute about 30 percent of formal sector employment in Swaziland. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- strains on the delivery of social services. In addition to alleviating some of the pressures on existing medical facilities posed by the ongoing HIV/AIDS crisis, there will be a need to substantially increase the training of health personnel. Similarly, in the education sector, the training of new teachers would need to be accelerated to offset the increase in absenteeism among existing teachers owing to the direct or indirect impact of the epidemic. 8. Swaziland has experienced deterioration in external competitiveness in real effective terms since 1999, despite the depreciation of the lilangeni vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar (Figure 2).6 The lilangeni followed the South African rand’s depreciation of about 35 percent against the U.S. dollar from the beginning of 2001 through end-January 2002. In conjunction with a terms of trade loss since 1998, Swaziland’s exports have declined as a share of world imports and of those of its major trading partner, South Africa. These developments come on the heels of an increase in private sector wages in the 1990s that outpaced those seen in neighboring countries (see Box 1). 9. The current account deficit of the balance of payments widened somewhat fron 1% percent of GDP in 1999 to about 3 percent of GDP in 2000, owing in part to declines in net services and income and official transfers (Table 3). Both exports and imports fell by about 3 percent in value terms in 2000. The global slowdown in economic activity led to further declines of exports and imports (in value terms) of about 13 percent and 19 percent, respectively in 2001. The current account deficit is estimated at about 2 percent of GDP in 2001, while the capital and financial accounts remained weak, given the low level of net foreign direct investment and the interest differential with South Africa. Net international reserves remained at about three months of import cover at end-October 2001. 10. There is limited scope for pursuit of an independent monetary policy, given the peg to the South African rand and membership in the Common Monetary Area (CMA). After tightening somewhat in 2000 and in line with developments in South Africa, the prime- lending rate fell by 50 basis points to 13% percent at end-January 2002. However, the treasury bill rate in Swaziland remains about 2 percentage points below that of South Africa as a result of a domestic liquidity requirement on Swazi banks (Figure 3). The lower level of economic activity and the banks’ preference for investing excess funds in South African money markets has led to a deceleration of private sector credit growth. This situation, in conjunction with the virtual absence of government borrowing from the banking system, has led to a steady decline in net domestic assets over the past few years. 6Given the predominance of trade with South Africa (about two-thirds of the total), to whose currency the lilangeni is pegged, changes in competitiveness are in large part determined by the inflation differential between the two countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 1. Developments in Competitiveness Swaziland’s export performance has weakened noticeably since 1999, reflecting a dctcrioration in external competitiveness. After increasing at an average of about 10 pcrccnt per year from 1986 to 1998, the volume of exports of goods and services declined by a cumulative 1.5 percent in the period from 1999 to 2001. The contribution of exports to GDP declined from about 75 percent in the mid-1990s to 64 percent in 2000. A number of different indicators provide evidence of the deterioration in competitiveness: . After depreciating by about 5 percent in 1997-98, the consumer price index-based real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by about 9 percent through September 2001. Given the predominance of trade with South Africa (about two-thirds of the total), to whose currency the lilangeni is pegged, changes in competitiveness as measured by the REER are in large part determined by the inflation differential between the two countries. . Swaziland has experienced a sizable terms of trade loss since 1998, as import price increases (including the impact of oil) have outpaced the rise in export prices. . Swaziland’s exports have not performed well relative to its major competitors. The share of Swaziland’s exports has declined both in terms of world imports (by more than 30 percent between 1994 and 2000) and in terms of South Africa’s imports. l Private sector wages have increased more rapidly in Swaziland than in its neighboring countries. While still well below those in South Africa, private sector wages (measured in U.S. dollar terms) have caught up with wages in Botswana and are practically three times those in Lesotho. . Other indicators suggest a deterioration in competitivcncss in Swaziland. Foreign direct investment has dcclincd significantly since the democratization of South Africa. Investor confidence indicators also point to a lack of optimism. The 2OOOlOl Africa Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum ranked Swaziland 10th out of 24 countries overall, but in the second-lowest place in terms of prospects for the future (optimism index) and improvement in business climate (improvement index) Real Effective Exchange Rate 1997 Jan 19% Jan 1999Jan 2000h 2001 Jan Monthly Wages (in US) 220 200 6 180 s B 160 0‘ '; 140 D 3 I20 100 80 Terms of Trade Impo~ ““!I Wl”C 1995 1996 1997 199x 1999 2000 2001 YCX Export Market Share 150 140 130 g- 120 T - F II0 = 100 j 90 80 70 60 38 36 92 90 1991 1992 1993 ,994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS A. Background 11. Against the backdrop of an uncertain external environment, the discussions focused on the medium-term challenge of reinvigorating growth, boosting employment, and raising the standard of living, while maintaining external viability. While the mission and the authorities concurred on the significant decline in competitiveness, there was a difference of views on how this deterioration could be credibly reversed. The authorities felt that an expansionary fiscal policy, focusing on large public capital projects in conjunction with the recent tax rate reductions, would serve the dual purpose of supporting domestic demand and improving the public infrastructure so as to make the economy more attractive for investors. The mission was of the view that an improvement of competitiveness would require restrained financial policies, given both the potentially sizeable pressures on the fiscal outlook as well as the key role of fiscal policy in strengthening the current account and reigning in inflation of nontradable goods by restraining aggregate demand. Structural measures would also play a critical role in enhancing competitiveness by moderating public sector wage settlements, reforming public enterprises, and strengthening the land tenure and banking systems. B. Medium-Term Setting 12. Swaziland’s medium-term prospects are difficult. The authorities recognize that they are faced with increasing fiscal pressures over the medium term, stemming from an projected erosion of what has been, to date, a significant portion of the tax base, the need for higher outlays on health and education, and an under funded pension system. Additional challenges on the external front are also likely to come from a prospective gradual loss of preferential markets for sugar. 13. A reduction in Swaziland’s receipts from the South African Customs Union (SACU) is envisaged over the medium term. Recent modifications to the SACU revenue-sharing agreement (See Box 2), South Africa’s ongoing trade liberalization (including, importantly the free trade agreement with the European Union), and the signing of the Southern African Development Community free trade protocol will result in a decline in the SACU revenue pool. Consequently, Swaziland’s share of receipts is expected to decline by about 20 percent in nominal terms, starting in 2003/04. Given its dependence on SACU for about half of its revenue, the impact on Swaziland of this decline will be significant and will require a diversification of the tax base. Moreover, the aim of harmonizing tax policy with South Africa may put downward pressure on tax rates. 14. The Public Service Pension Fund (PF) is severely underfunded and will contribute to fiscal pressures over the medium term. Established in 1993, the PF is a defined-benefit scheme in which members contribute at rates of 5 to 10 percent of pensionable salary, with the government contributing an additional 15 percent. As of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 2. The New SACU Agreement After several years of negotiations, a new SACU agreement was initialed in October 2001; it will now have to be ratified by the countries’ parliaments. The new agreement envisages two major changes: Institutional arrangements The SACU Council of Ministers will decide external tariff changes (previously, this was done by the South African government). Recommendations on tariff changes will come from a new Tariff Board (composed of independent experts) or from the SACU Commission (the senior officials reporting to the Council). A new secretariat, responsible for SACU’s administration, will be established either in Lesotho, Namibia, or Swaziland. Revenue Sharing The new agreement simplifies the formulas, eliminates the revenue floor and shortens the time lag between actual trade and distribution of tax receipts: . customs duties - distributed in proportion to the value of imports from other SACU countries; 0 excises - 8.5 percent distributed on the basis of relative GDP of the five countries, and the remaining 1.5 percent distributed on the basis of per capita income, in the form of development assistance. March 2000, the ratio of the actuarial value of assets to the expected pension liabilities was estimated at about 42 percent, with a resulting deficit of about E 1.7 billion (about 20 percent of GDP). 15. Swaziland’s preferential access to sugar markets will erode gradually.7 The EU’s recent “everything-but-arms” trade agreement is expected to lead to a shift in its sugar imports (at preferential prices) away from Swaziland toward lesser-developed countries. While they have recovered somewhat from their trough in 1999, free market sugar prices remain, according to the Swaziland Sugar Association, somewhat below the break-even point for Swaziland’s producers. 7 Sugar and its processed derivatives account for more than 20 percent of GDP and about one-third of Swaziland’s exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- C. Medium-Term Outlook 16. In the absence of corrective policies, the prospective external and fiscal pressures mentioned above are likely to threaten macroeconomic stability. The medium-term projections, which the mission discussed with the authorities, show that, in the absence of adjustment, the fiscal position would deteriorate to deficits on the order of 7 percent of GDP by 2006 (Table 5). Demand pressures would keep price and wage inflation at levels higher than those forecast for South Africa; in conjunction with moderate export growth, the external current account deficit would widen to about 6 percent of GDP. With competitiveness considerations keeping investor inflows at moderate levels, these developments would lead to a draw down of reserves that, in turn, would jeopardize the exchange rate peg. A decline in domestic saving, combined with low levels of investor confidence, would limit economic growth to about l %-2% percent, which would be insufficient to maintain per capita income levels. 17. There is a need for prompt implementation of policies aimed at tackling financial imbalances and effecting structural reforms. A strengthening of the public finances (aiming at a primary surplus over the next few years) would alleviate pressures on the external current account and provide greater room for credit to the private sector. An easing of demand pressures would also narrow the inflation gap with trading partners (including, importantly, South Africa), leading to an improvement in competitiveness. Investor sentiment would be buoyed by structural reforms, which would help raise economic efficiency and lead to a higher growth path, with annual growth rates exceeding 4 percent over the medium term. Increased exports and larger foreign direct investment inflows, in response to improved investor sentiment, would strengthen the import cover for foreign exchange reserves to reach about 4 months of imports by 2006. A macroeconomic framework, consistent with a reform scenario of this kind, is presented in Table 5. D. Fiscal Policy 18. During the discussions, the authorities recognized the need for fiscal adjustment but felt that this could be accomplished gradually over the medium term. In the short term, the authorities had already developed a budget outlook paper for 2002103, approved by the cabinet, which aimed at a fiscal deficit of some 6 percent of GDP, with significant increases for wages and capital outlays.8 In addition to the Maguga dam that is about to become operational, large capital projects included the Komati Basin Irrigation Project and the public portion of the Millennium Projects (see below). The authorities emphasized that, in designing and instituting fiscal reforms over the medium term, they would be guided by the upcoming fiscal restructuring project (whose goals are, inter alia, to strengthen fiscal * The authorities announced plans to issue E 230 million in notes in the domestic market as a way of financing the fiscal deficit for 2002/03. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- management and develop a medium-term budgetary framework), sponsored by the European Union. 19. While supporting the fiscal restructuring project, the mission recommended a broad range of measures that could be taken in the short run and would make inroads in the needed fiscal adjustment. For 2002/03, the mission indicated that a fiscal deficit of about 2 percent of GDP would be consistent with enhancing competitiveness (by containing inflationary pressures), safeguarding macroeconomic stability, and preventing crowding out of domestic credit to the private sector. In particular, the mission recommended measures aimed at broadening the tax base, reinforcing tax administration, and appropriately sequencing civil service reform. There was also a need to reallocate budgetary resources toward health and education. 20. The authorities were encouraged to move ahead with efforts to broaden the tax base. In particular, several measures merited consideration (some of which had been part of the proposed Income Tax Act amendments): (i) incorporating the commercial activities on Swazi Nation land into the tax net; (ii) broadening the sales tax base to include utilities and the trade sector; (iii) including fringe benefits in the income tax net; (iv) reducing the use of tax concessions for developmental purposes while eliminating the five-year tax holiday; and (v) removing training allowances from the corporate income tax. Certain public enterprise statutes that asserted an income tax exemption needed to be amended in order to avoid a potential legal conflict with the Income Tax Act amendments. In addition, Tibiyo Taka Ngwane’s tax-exempt status should be formally revoked.’ The authorities indicated that they would include some of these measures in the context of the 2002/03 budget and were hoping for a favorable response from parliament. 21. The mission and the authorities agreed that there was a continued need to strengthen tax administration, particularly in terms of audit and enforcement. In addition to introducing a unique taxpayer identification number, enhanced coordination between the Income Tax and the Customs and Excise Departments (as well as the computerization of the latter department) would greatly facilitate the cross-checking efforts of the tax administration. In the context of an eventual introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) to replace the existing sales tax (a measure that the authorities were considering for implementation over the medium term), the mission recommended some up-front basic administrative changes, such as the introduction of self-assessment principles within the existing income and sales tax. 9 Tibiyo Taka Ngwane is a national trust for the Swazi nation, under the auspices of the King. Initially sustained on revenues from the mineral sector, it is now a vast conglomerate (including 15 s u st laries) with extensive holdings across the spectrum of Swazi business, b ‘d’ including agriculture, agro-processing, mining, timber, manufacturing, financial services, and media and communications. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 22. The government’s civil service reform program would need to be sequenced carefully. The authorities noted that calls of public sector wage increases had intensified, in line with the recommendations of the Dupuis Report on raising salaries and widening wage dispersion in order to attract and retain skilled public sector employees. At the same time, the Public Sector Management Program had been frustratingly slow in identifying ways to reduce the size of the civil service. The mission noted that the intention to partially implement the recommendation of the Dupuis Report, in the context of the 2002/03 budget (public sector wages would increase by about 25 percent in 2002/03) ran counter to efforts aimed at containing the wage bill. Only once the Public Sector Management Program was well under way and the size of the civil service had been significantly reduced should consideration be given to implementation of recommendations of the Dupuis Report. Large public sector wage increases also had critical economy-wide repercussions, as they had a demonstration effect on wage agreements in the private sector. 23. The authorities agreed on the importance of a significant improvement in the underlying implementation capacity of the capital budget. In this context, the mission advised that allocations*for capital projects in 2002/03 be strictly curtailed to realistic levels based on past implementation capacity. The mission welcomed the authorities’ intended devolution of the majority of the Millennium Projects to the private sector and stressed the importance, for the few projects where government participation would be warranted, of first ensuring their economic viability.” 24. The authorities recognized the difficult financial situation of the Public Service Pension Fund. As a way to gradually reduce the unfunded liabilities, the mission agreed with the authorities’ proposal that consideration should be given to an increase in the government’s statutory contribution to the pension fund, as well as a gradual increase in the retirement age from 60 to 65 years of age-though the latter measure would be unpopular, given that life expectancy was declining rapidly owing to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. E. Banking Sector and External Policies 25. The vulnerability of the commercial banking system has declined, with the ratio of nonperforming loans of the three private commercial banks dropping markedly over the past two years. The improvement in the profitability of the three private commercial banks has stemmed from increased efficiency in their operations (‘particularly for Swazliand’s largest bank), a steady shift from interest to fee-based income, and improved risk management. This has led to improved provisioning for nonperforming loans. With lo The Millennium Projects envisage the construction of a convention/trade center, a major hotel/sporting complex, an amusement/theme park, a new international airport and a new parliament building. An allocation of 1% percent of GDP was made for the first phase of the Millennium Projects in the 2001/02 budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- nonperforming loans of the three private, foreign-owned commercial banks amounting to less than 10 percent of their loan portfolio in 2000 and remaining at lower levels throughout 200 1, the remaining stock of nonperforming loans is no longer being considered a source of instability for the banking system. Between 1999 and 2000, net earnings of the three privately-owned commercial banks increased by about 10 percent and remained strong through 2001. A description of the banking system in Swaziland can be found in Box 3. Box 3. The Banking System in Swaziland While still vulnerable, the soundness of the banking sector has improved. Commercial banking in Swaziland is dominated by short-term lending to the agro-processing sector and, in particular, to the sugar industry. The industry’s commercial risk is reduced considerably by longer-term preferential agreements for the marketing of sugar from Swaziland that guarantee stable prices above world market levels, making short-term lending to the Swaziland Sugar Association and the sugar mills not only highly profitable, but also increasingly competitive. There are four commercial banks currently operating in Swaziland. Standard Bank Swaziland Ltd. is the largest, with a market share of almost 50 percent for both deposits and loans. While Nedbank (Swaziland) Ltd. and the First National Bank of Swaziland Ltd. are also subsidiaries of South African banking groups, the Swaziland Development and Savings Bank (SDSB) is owned by the government of Swaziland and offers both commercial banking services and development finance. All three foreign- owned banks concentrate on corporate lending to local (mostly agro-processing) industry, since foreign- controlled businesses and the government do not rely on the local banking system for finance and individual borrowers often lack collateral, which results in a low diversification of credit risk. In this context, the establishment of a domestic market for government securities could help to increase the diversification of credit risk, and, ultimately, strengthen the profitability of the banking sector. After its recapitalization by the government, the Swaziland Development and Savings Bank (SDSB) is set to effectively compete with the three commercial banks, while continuing to provide development finance, in particular to the agricultural sector. The SDSB regained its full banking license in September 2001, It offers the full range of commercial banking services, but is also required by its statutes to play a role in promoting rural development, infrastructure development, and local empowerment. The bank’s profitability will depend on whether the enhanced risk management procedures are rigorously applied and the bank is able to regain clients’ confidence. However, the bank will continue to rely on transfers from the budget through 2004. Start-up enterprises also have access to the Small Scale Enterprise Loan Guarantee Scheme administered by the Central Bank of Swaziland. Under the scheme, the Central Bank of Swaziland guarantees 75 percent of the principal of the loan up to a limit of E 150,000. Applications for credit are assessed based on a commercial bank’s evaluation. The scheme has not been very successful, mainly because commercial banks require applicants to provide collateral for the remaining 2.5 percent and to have an account with them, which, in turn, requires employment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 26. The Swaziland Development and Savings Bank (SDSB) remains a significant cause for concern. After its restructuring and a government recapitalization,” the SDSB’s commercial banking operations were effectively relaunched when it regained its full banking license in September 200 1. However, efforts aimed at a recovery of the bank’s large stock of nonperforming loans, which still account for about 80 percent of the total loan portfolio, have not been successful. The authorities’ concerns about the commercial viability of the SDSB are reflected in the monetary authorities’ very close supervision of the bank’s operations. As of end-September 200 1, the SDSB held a share of 1.4 percent in the market for loans and advances and a share of 8.1 percent in the market for deposits, making it the smallest of the four commercial banks currently operating in Swaziland. While the recent progress in the bank’s operations has been somewhat encouraging, the main sources of concern are the SDSB’s continuing role in development finance, the concentration of its lending operations in the smaller (and less profitable) sugar growers, the implementation of enhanced risk management procedures, and the ongoing commitment of budgetary resources to the bank’s restructuring-with a possible negative impact on banking competition in Swaziland. The mission reiterated its position that commercial and developmental activities should be disentangled and taken up by different entities, in order to establish greater transparency and better accountability of the bank’s financial operations. 27. The mission welcomed the proposed amendments to the Central Bank Order and the Financial Institutions Act, both of which were under consideration by the cabinet, and the recent implementation of the electronic payments clearing system.12 These amendments will enhance the soundness of the banking system by strengthening banking supervision and enhancing central bank independence. Over time, the reserve requirement on banks (4 percent) could be lowered toward the level prevailing in South Africa (2% percent), thereby effectively reducing the implicit tax on intermediation. At the same time, the authorities could put upward pressure on the yields for comparable assets in Swaziland by expanding the list of eligible assets for the domestic liquidity requirement (15 percent) to include holdings of South African securities, with a view to eventually removing the domestic liquidity requirement. In order not to jeopardize the return or increase the risk profile of the Public Service Pension Fund’s asset portfolio, the authorities were encouraged to postpone the amendments to the pending Retirement Fund Act, which aimed a recalling investments held abroad (primarily in South Africa) by domestic pension funds. Finally, the authorities were congratulated for the recent implementation of the electronic l1 The government used budgetary resources to increase the SDSB’s equity capital from E 9.8 million to E 54.8 million in June 2001. l2 The amendments to the Central Bank Order strengthen the Central Bank by focusing its role on the promotion of monetary stability, and giving it explicit regulation and supervision authority over financial institutions and the payments system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- payments clearing system as it would enhance the speed and efficiency of banking transactions. 28. The authorities expressed a continued firm commitment to the peg of the lilangeni to the South African rand and to the CMA. There is a valid case for retaining the present exchange rate regime, given the close trading and financial relationships between Swaziland and South Africa and supported by South Africa’s commitment to inflation targeting. However, the mission underscored the importance of a substantial fiscal consolidation and structural overhaul to ensure the credibility of the exchange rate peg. The mission also commended the authorities for advancing capital account integration within the CMA by further relaxing remaining limitations on access to foreign exchange for specific transactions. l3 29. Trade liberalization continued in 2001.14 The authorities noted that, in addition to applying SACU’s low common external tariff, they had further relaxed the controls on the importation of goods. While permits were needed for all imports previously, the coverage had been reduced to a small negative list requiring approval. The staff encouraged the authorities to consider the removal of the remaining nontariff barriers, particularly in the case of permits for the importation of some agricultural products (which appear to have been applied restrictively), as this would help alleviate inflationary pressures in the economy. The authorities also noted that the SADC free trade protocol had been agreed in principle, but had not been signed yet. F. Structural Reforms 30. There is a need to enhance the efficiency of the public enterprise sector and to reduce its dependence on budgetary resources. Transfers and subsidies to public enterprises have accounted for the bulk of noninterest nonwage current outlays in the budget over the past decade. The mission welcomed the intention to proceed with the formulation of the privatization policy, which was about to be submitted by consultants to the government. 13Regarding the remaining exchange controls, there was a further relaxation of travel, study, and other allowances and investment limits for private individuals. In addition, the authorities removed the approval requirement for interest payments on loans and for capital investments by nonresidents in domestic companies through the stock market, eliminated the exchange limit on casino gambling and lottery winnings, increased the limits for a number of other transactions, and limited the coverage of the system of import permits to a small negative list of imported items. 14Swaziland maintains a relatively open trade regime with a trade restrictiveness index of 5 (on a range of l-10, with 10 being the most restricitve). Tariff rates range from 0 to 72 percent, with a simple average rate of 13 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- In general, the mission underscored the need to accelerate the restructuring of public enterprises; particularly those that continued to incur sizable losses (such as the Central Transport Administration) and were not adhering to the financial disclosure requirement of the Public Enterprises Unit. This would send a strong signal to the investor community of the government’s commitment to improving the efficiency of the economy. 31. Further land reform aimed at addressing tenure arrangements is likely to yield large efficiency gains and can play a fundamental role in alleviating poverty. In particular, the staff argued that strengthened land tenure arrangements would serve to improve the efficiency of land use and would lead to enhanced investment in the important agricultural sector. The authorities reported that a new Land Policy Act, which addresses land tenure arrangements on Swazi Nation land and would institute 99-year leases for agricultural and peri-urban land, had already been approved by the cabinet, and submitted to the Swazi National Council. The Land Resettlement Policy, still to be submitted to the cabinet, sought to identify land suitable for agriculture, as well as to ensure the access of women to such land. The mission welcomed these initiatives, as they would afford small-scale farmers and cooperatives greater opportunity to provide collateral to banks. Box 4 provides a description of land tenure policy in Swaziland. 32. The authorities recognize the seriousness of the HIV/AIDS problem, with the King declaring the epidemic a national crisis. However, despite the magnitude of the problem, program implementation and interagency coordination have been slow to materialize, resulting in an underutilization of budgetary allocations for HIV/AIDS (see Box 5). Donors and nongovernmental organizations have taken up some of the programs. To accelerate program implementation, a royal commission will be appointed to formulate an effective strategy for addressing HIV/AIDS, and to act as a liaison with the donor community and international organizations. The mission noted the initiatives that had been taken by the government but stressed that the urgency of the epidemic called for immediate implementation and effective coordination of programs. 33. The mission emphasized the need for reversing the recent deterioration in Swaziland’s external competitiveness and allowing for optimal private sector participation in the economy. The authorities responded that the planned Millennium Projects (new airport, convention center, hotel, amusement park, and factory shells) was aimed at improving the environment for private sector participation, while the Swaziland Investment Promotion Agency (SIPA) had been established to promote foreign direct investment. The authorities acknowledged the importance of securing private sector financing for commercially oriented projects and pointed out that an investment/donors’ conference was being planned for March 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 4. Land Tenure Policy Since the early 1900s Swaziland has developed a multiple land tenure system, with land held in customary tenure, or Swazi Nation land (SNL); land held by freehold tenure, or title deed land (TDL); and Crown land. TDL tenure, which accounts for slightly more than one-third of the country, recognizes exclusive rights of access to a defined piece of land. Individual or corporate owners of TDL hold titles and can sell the land or use it as collateral. The state can withdraw the title in land that is required for national development only after making appropriate compensation. SNL tenure, which accounts for slightly less than two-thirds of Swaziland, is characterized by a more complex structure that has never been defined by legislation. SNL is held by the King in trust for the nation and is allocated by chiefs to homestead heads, who-under Swazi law and custom-are men.’ While membership in a local community is generally the condition for the right to receive or to be allocated land, it can also be acquired through heritage. Finally, a very small portion of Swaziland is Crown land, in particular the urban areas. The initiative for land reform in Swaziland began during the 1990s largely in response to credit constraints and also to a fundamental lack of control over SNL. Farmers on SNL are unable to mortgage their land by using it as collateral, which constrains their access to commercial credit and, hence, to investment and productivity increases. In addition, SNL constrains the farmers’ ability to make fundamental decisions regarding farming practices and the use of their land. Since the average individual farming area on SNL has a size ofjust 2.7 hectares and cannot be merged with other areas, the scope for efficiency gains is limited. As a result, SNL contributes only 15 percent to Swaziland’s agricultural output. The Land Policy Act, which addresses tenure arrangements on SNL, has been approved by the cabinet and submitted to the Swazi National Council. It would introduce a 99-year lease of agricultural and peri- urban land aimed at affording small-scale farmers and cooperatives greater opportunity to provide collateral to banks and, ultimately, at improving the efficiency of land use in Swaziland. In addition, the Land Resettlement Policy, which has not yet been submitted to the cabinet, aims at identifying land for agricultural use and give female farmers access to land. However, it remains unclear whether commercial banks would accept the 99-year leases on SNL as collateral and how they would value them in this function. At present, only the Swaziland Development and Savings Bank and most of the 61 credit cooperatives are providing agricultural finance to smallholders, mostly using cattle as collateral. Agricultural cooperatives, which provide farmers with seeds and other inputs for production against cash payment and often arrange for the marketing of the agricultural output, withdrew from agricultural finance several years ago because they were lacking both the necessary administrative capacities and banking experience. The free availability of SNL and the rising cost of living in urban areas have encouraged more people to leave the cities and settle in peri-urban and rural areas. These settlements often hamper the efficient use of land for agricultural purposes. However, Swazi land policy also aims at extending basic infrastructure (water and electricity) to these areas, though at a cost for the settlers, in order to further encourage the development of these areas; this development may, eventually, lead to a more efficient use of SNL. ” Although many women are de facto heads of homesteads, land is allocated to them only through male proxies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-20 - Box 5. The National Response to HIV/AIDS With an HIV-positive prevalence rate of over 25 percent and an estimated 10,000 orphans at end-1999 (out of a total population of 980,000), the epidemic is expected to have a significant impact on demographic and social patterns, and constrain economic growth. Significant events 1987 1999 2000 The Swaziland National AIDS Programme (SNAP) is established as a unit in the Ministry of Health. King Mswati III declares HIV/AIDS a national disaster. The government establishes an HIV/AIDS Crisis Management and Technical Committee (CMTC) to draft a national strategy and to coordinate the national response. The CMTC issues its first draft of a Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS in September. Impact on the ground Notwithstanding the early initial response by the government and subsequent efforts by King Mswati III to both highlight the issue and seek external funding, there have been delays in the implementation of strategies and plans. After responsibility for its operations was shifted among different government agencies, the CMTC has not followed through on its mandate to “coordinate the national response.” Its operations have apparently been suspended, but its responsibilities have not formally been handed over to a successor agency. While SNAP views its own mandate as primarily a coordinating agency, its authority to provide the broad coordination necessary for what must necessarily be a multisectoral response remains unclear. In practice, SNAP’s resources are limited and its own activities on the ground effectively reduced to a communication campaign. Its own budgetary allocations for drug purchases (the only item in its budget not directed to communication and overhead expenditures) have largely gone unspent over the last three years, as detailed below. For reference, SNAP’s total budgetary allocation for 2001/02 was E 2.6 million. SNAP Budget, 1999/2000-2001/02 ” (In thousands of U.S. dollars) Fiscal Year Budget 1 outturn 1999100 2000/01 2001/02 21 Source: Ministry of Finance. l/ April 1 -March 3 1. 2/ Through end-November 200 1. 4.4 0.0 140.2 48.1 128.4 24.5 In the absence of an effective national response at the implementation level, NGOs and multilateral agencies have responded by going ahead with their own interventions. Although these agencies have set up their own coordinating body, their efforts have not been frilly comprehensive and have often been slowed by diplomatic considerations and delays in formal approval by the Ministry of Health. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- G. Statistical Issues 34. Little progress on statistical issues was noted since the last Article IV consultation, particularly with regard to deficiencies in the data on the balance of payments and national accounts: l While the balance of payments is consistent with the Fund’s Balance ofPayments Manual (fifth edition), timely compilation is still hampered by long lags in the collection of even basic trade data, in part owing to the lack of adequate computer resources. Large errors and omissions were also again noted, stemming mainly from l difficulties in accurately monitoring short-term private capital flows between Swaziland and South Africa on account of their close capital integration. However, the staff welcomed progress made by the Central Bank of Swaziland in moving recently from an annual to semiannual compilation of the balance of payments and in forecasting the outturn for 2001; however, it still encouraged the authorities to eventually shift to the quarterly compilation carried out by many countries. l National accounts suffer from serious deficiencies, in particular a lack of timeliness in data compilation. Data on unemployment are provided on an ad hoc basis only. The staff thus welcomed Swaziland’s participation in the preparatory meeting for the GDDS Project for Anglophone African Countries, held in Botswana in early December 200 1. 35. The mission also urged the authorities to make much-needed improvements to the country’s economic database in order to facilitate effective policy formulation and surveillance. To this end, the authorities were encouraged to provide somewhat greater resources to this area and to follow up on the remaining recommendations of the various technical assistance missions in recent years. In this regard, the authorities indicated their interest in participating in the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) to provide an effective framework for identifying their most critical statistical deficiencies and the corresponding needs for additional technical assistance. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 36. There is a need to reinvigorate growth in Swaziland in order to increase employment and raise the standard of living. Economic activity has slowed over the past few years, owing in large part to a decline in competitiveness, while other socioeconomic indicators deteriorated during the latter half of the 1990s. Only when annual real growth rates increase to well above 3 percent will there be noticeable improvements in per capita income. To help ensure such an outcome, it will be necessary to implement restrained financial policies that recognize both the potentially sizable pressures on the fiscal and external outlook and the key role of fiscal policy in strengthening the current account and restraining aggregate demand. Structural measures will also play a critical role by moderating public sector wage settlements, reforming public enterprises, and strengthening the land tenure and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - banking systems. Delays in undertaking such an adjustment will make the eventual task much more daunting. 37. A shift toward a more expansionary fiscal policy, as suggested by the 2002/03 budget outlook paper, runs the risk of leading to a further deterioration in competitiveness and threatening macroeconomic stability. The staff believes that there is scope for accommodating high priority outlays within an appropriate overall fiscal deficit target of about 2 percent of GDP in 2002/03. In this context, the authorities are encouraged to reorient both current and capital spending toward the health and education sectors while reducing the overall level of budgetary outlays; to expand the tax base to compensate for the projected reductions in trade taxes; to reduce the use of tax concessions; and to strengthen the tax administration. It will also be important to undertake prompt measures aimed at strengthening the Pension Fund’s finances. In enhancing the underlying implementation capacity of the capital budget, the authorities are encouraged to strictly curtail budgetary allocations for capital projects to realistic levels, based on past implementation capacity. In addition, public sector involvement in the Millennium Projects should take place only after a rigorous assessment of their viability and an exhaustive search for private sector participants. 38. The government’s civil service reform program will need to be sequenced carefully. In the first instance, there is a need to expedite the work of the Public Service Public Sector Management Program, so that the size of the civil service can be concurrently reduced. In the nearer term, the authorities should strive to keep overall wage increases at, or below, inflation in order to restrict inflationary pressures in the nontradable sector and to maintain external competitiveness. Public sector wage negotiations have an important demonstration effect on wage agreements in the private sector; as such, they exert a significant influence on economy-wide unit labor costs. It is only once the Public Sector Management Program is well under way and the size of the civil service has been significantly reduced that consideration should be given to implementing the recommendations of the Dupuis Report on raising salaries and widening wage dispersion with a view to attracting and retaining skilled employees. 39. The public enterprise sector needs to enhance its efficiency and reduce its dependence on budgetary resources. The staff hopes that the forthcoming consultancy report will serve as a useful tool in furthering the privatization process. However, there is a concurrent need to accelerate the restructuring process of public enterprises more generally. Particular emphasis should be placed on public enterprises that continue to incur sizable losses, as well as those that have failed to abide by the financial disclosure requirement of the Public Enterprises Unit. 40. The Swaziland Development and Savings Bank (SDSB) remains a significant cause for concern. Despite its recent recapitalization from the budget and the full provisioning of its nonperforming loans, the SDSB’s ongoing viability will depend on a rigorous application of enhanced risk management procedures and on the profitability of its banking services. While its operations should continue to be closely monitored by the Central Bank of Swaziland’s Banking Supervision Department, the mission reiterates the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - recommendation that the SDSB’s commercial and developmental activities be kept separate. As a way of strengthening banking supervision and central bank independence, the mission welcomes the proposed amendments to the Central Bank Order and the Financial Institutions Order. As the supervision of the banks is further strengthened, the reserve requirement on banks could be lowered over time, effectively reducing the implicit tax on intermediation. 41. The exchange rate peg to the South African rand and membership in the Common Monetary Area (CMA) has served Swaziland well. The authorities’ intention to retain the present exchange rate regime has merit, given the close trading and financial relationships between Swaziland and South Africa in conjunction with South Africa’s commitment to containing inflation. However, a substantial fiscal consolidation and structural reforms will be necessary in order to bolster the credibility of the exchange rate peg. Restrained financial policies will need to play a key role in improving competitiveness and lead to a further strengthening of Swaziland’s international reserve position. 42. Strengthened land tenure arrangements will lead to enhanced investment in the important agricultural sector. To this end, recent progress in reforming the land tenure policy is encouraging, including the proposal to institute 99-year leases of agricultural and peri-urban land, aimed at affording small-scale farmers and cooperatives greater opportunity to provide collateral to banks. 43. There is a need to improve the timeliness and comprehensiveness of economic data in order to enhance policymaking. Significant inadequacies in the economic statistics remain, particularly relating to national income, balance of payments, and government accounts. The mission encourages the authorities to devote increased resources to the compilation of economic statistics, improve the timeliness of reporting of economic data, and make greater use of Internet-based methods of data dissemination. The authorities could usefully consider participating in the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System, which will provide a framework for the evaluation of the current statistical system, the identification of critical needs, and the coordination of technical assistance. 44. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Swaziland be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 1. Swaziland: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2001 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel Est. (Annual percentage change, unless othcrwisc speciticd) NatIonal income and prices GDP at constant prxes GDP per capita at constant prices Consumer prices (average) Consumer prices (end of period) External sector Exports, f.o.b. (in milhons of U.S. dollars) Imports, f.o.b. (in millions of U.S. dollars) Exports. f.o.b. Ii Impolts. f.o.b. I/ Nominal effective exchange rate 21 Real effective exchange rate 21 Money and credit Broad money Net foreign assets Domestic credit Government (net) Nongovemment Other Items (net) Velocity (GDP/ broad money) Prime lendmg rate (in percent; end of period) Interest rates on 12.month time deposits (in percent; end of period) Gross national savings 16.7 15.0 19.8 17.2 16.8 16.4 Ofwhich. government 4.2 6.6 7.6 5.1 4.5 4.0 Gross domestic investment 20.7 20.6 22.4 18.8 19.8 186 Ofwhich. government 5.0 4.8 5.9 62 6.1 7.1 Central government finance (fiscal year) 3/ Total ~revenue and grants Ofwhich- South African Customs Union (SACU) rcccipts Total expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Ofwhuzh : wages and salaries Capital expenditure and net lending Central government balance (including grants) Foreign financing Domestic financing Trade balance (merchandise goods) -15.5 -14.9 -8.9 -9.5 -9.2 -4.0 Gun-ent account balance -4.0 -5.6 -2.6 -1.5 -3.0 -2.1 Capital and financial account balance 2.3 31 104 I4 3.3 I .o Ovel-all balance 41 1.2 1.8 3.8 1.6 -0.5 -0.1 External debt 18.5 16.0 21.2 23.2 25.0 28.2 Memorandum Items: GDP in current prices (in millions of emalangeni) 5,686 Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) 16 Net official international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 258 (m months of imports of goods and nonfactor services) 2.4 3.9 3.8 3.2 3.5 2.2 I .6 06 0.5 0.0 0.5 -0.7 -1.2 6.4 7.9 7.5 5.9 99 1.5 5.8 7.8 4.9 9.1 6.4 10.0 855 853 978 937 909 194 -1,062 - 1,067 -1,099 -1,068 -1,038 -844 -1.5 -0.3 14.7 -4.2 -2 9 -12 7 -0.3 0.5 3.1 -2.9 -2.7 -18.7 -2.2 -0.3 -2.2 -1.1 -0 7 -I 7 -2.4 -0.1 -0.8 0.0 4.0 0 5 (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise speclfied) 16.3 19.4 12.9 15.6 -6.6 10.5 36.1 17.1 43.8 13.5 2.0 37.9 -12.0 -3.6 -23.2 -0.5 -5.5 -33.2 -16.7 -10.4 -28.6 -3.9 -8.5 -18.9 4.6 6.9 5.5 3.4 3.0 -14.3 -7.7 5.9 -7.8 2.7 -3.1 5.8 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.5 4.9 19.8 18.X 21.0 15.0 14.0 13.1 13.4 11.8 14.1 8.0 7.0 6.4 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwse specified) 28.8 29.9 29.6 29.4 28.5 27.7 14.4 14.8 14.0 14.0 14.2 13 5 30.1 27.1 29.1 31.2 30.0 31.4 25.1 22.5 220 25.1 23.9 24.0 12.4 I I.7 10.8 12.4 11.8 11.8 5.0 4.7 7.2 6.1 6.1 75 -1.3 2.8 0.5 -1.7 -1.5 -3.7 0.2 0.6 2.6 -1.0 1.2 2.1 1.1 -3.4 -3.0 2.7 0.2 1.6 6,613 7,449 8,410 9,673 10,654 25 51 21 -7 -I 284 329 314 293 265 2.6 3.0 3.0 28 32 230 288 319 351 350 Total external debt (in millions of 1J.S. dollars) 246 Source: Swaai authorities; and Fund staff estimates I/ Based on values in U.S. dollars. 21 IMF Information Notice System trade-weighted; period average 31 The fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 3 1. 41 Including net errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 2 Swaziland: Summary of Central Government Operations, 1997/9X-2002/03 li 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000101 2001/02 2002/03 Rev. Revised Est. 31 Budget 21 Total revenue and grants Tax TeYe”“e Of which Southern Afilca” Customs Lnlon (SACU) receipts Nontax revenue Grants Total expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Wages and salaries Goods and services Interest payments Subsidies and transfers Of which. Soniinanc~al public enterprises Capital expenditure Net lending Primary balance 231 87 -73 Overall balance (Including grants) 188 36 -150 Financing -188 -36 150 Foreign (net) 42 198 -88 Domestic (net) -230 -234 238 Total revenue and grants Tax revenue Of whrch: SACU receipts Nontax revenue Grants Total expenditure and “et lending Current expenditure Of which. Wages and salaries Goods and services Subsidies and transfers Capital expenditure Prunary balance Overall balance Financmg -2.8 -0.5 1.7 I.5 6.6 3.7 5.5 Foreibm (net) 0.6 2.6 -1.0 1.2 2.8 2.1 2.3 Dome&c (net) -3.4 -3.0 2.7 0.2 3.9 1.6 3.2 2,039 2,275 2,568 1,883 2,042 2,369 1,007 137 18 1,850 1,532 797 436 43 256 1,076 1,222 188 167 45 32 2,239 2,718 1,689 2,187 833 1,080 463 545 51 17 342 486 74 132 140 323 483 534 -4 67 -3 2,825 3,063 2,574 2,73 I 1,407 1,504 139 174 112 157 2,972 3,799 2,371 2,677 1,171 1,320 579 642 68 79 552 636 I21 603 1,092 -I 31 -79 -657 -147 -737 147 731 123 307 24 429 3,082 3,400 2,782 3,044 1,503 143 157 3,494 2,663 1,314 639 79 630 1,680 226 130 4,098 3,106 1,524 733 126 723 802 991 29 0 -332 -572 -411 -698 411 698 232 292 179 406 29.9 27.6 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified) 29.6 29.4 28.5 21.6 26.6 27.2 26.0 24.6 27.7 26.7 25.0 23.9 14.8 2.0 0.3 27.1 22.5 14.0 14.0 14.2 13.5 2.4 1.9 1.4 1.6 0.6 0.4 1.1 1.4 29.1 31.2 30.0 34.2 22.0 25.1 23.9 24. I 13.5 1.3 1.4 31.4 24.0 13.2 1.8 1.0 32.1 24.4 11.7 10.8 12.4 11.8 Il.9 11.8 12.0 6.4 6.0 6.2 5.8 5.8 5.8 5.8 3.8 4.4 5.6 5.6 5.7 5.7 5.7 4.7 6.3 6.1 6.1 9.8 7.2 7.8 3.4 1.1 -0.8 -0.8 -5.9 -3.0 -4.5 2.8 0.5 -1.7 -1.5 -6.6 -3.7 -5.5 Memorandum item: GDP at current market prices (in millions of emalangeni) 5/ 6,822 7,690 8,726 9,918 11,114 11,114 12,746 (In millions of emalangeni) Proj. 41 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 The fiscal year runs From April I to March 3 I. 21 Reflects supplementary budget January 2001 and internal adJustme”tS by 1Ministry of Finance. 31 Estimates by Ministry of Finance as ofoctober 2001. 41 Revenue projections, except for “SACU receipts”, adjusted for difference in GDP projection. “Capital expenditure” adjusted by rate of execution fo 5/Converted to a liscal-year basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Swaziland: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. Current account balance -53 -80 -35 -21 -42 -27 Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. -206 -214 -121 855 853 978 -1,062 -1,067 -1,099 -131 -129 -50 937 909 794 1,068 -1,038 -844 Services (net) Exports of services Imports of services -141 -121 -105 101 I25 120 -242 -245 -224 -91 -116 -103 103 94 60 -194 -210 -162 Goods and services balance -347 -335 -226 -222 -245 -152 Income (net) Income (credits) Income (debits) Of whrch : interest 133 138 57 202 183 169 -69 -45 -112 -18 -20 -16 88 76 38 164 131 93 -76 -55 -55 -17 -19 -22 Transfers (net) Official sector (nonduty Southern African Customs Union receipt Private sector 161 116 134 159 117 131 2 -1 2 113 127 88 126 119 96 -13 7 -8 Capital and financial account balance 31 45 19 47 12 Capital account balance 0 0 0 0 0 Financial account balance (excluding reserve assets) Direct investment Portfolio investment Other investment 30 45 141 28 -3 130 -2 -2 1 4 50 10 19 47 12 87 6 26 6 -2 0 -74 43 -13 Errors and omissions 37 61 -60 -13 -26 -14 Overall balance 14 26 -15 -22 -28 Memorandum items: Current account/GDP (m percent) Net official reserves (end of period) In months of imports of goods and services Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) Total external debt Public external debt Private external debt Total extcmal debt/GDP (in percent) GDP at current prices Emalangeni per U.S. dollar (end of period) Emalangeni per U.S. dollar (period average) -4.0 -5.6 -2.6 258 284 329 2.4 2.6 3.0 1.9 2.0 1.5 246 230 288 192 178 244 54 52 45 18 16 21 1,331 1,437 1,359 4.68 4.87 5.86 4.27 4.60 5.48 -1.5 -3.0 -2.1 314 293 265 3.0 2.8 3.2 1.6 1.9 2.6 319 351 350 267 266 286 52 85 64 23 25 28 1,377 1,401 1,239 6.15 7.57 11.00 6.11 6.91 8.60 Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Swaziland: Monetary Survey, 1996-2001 l/ 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Monetary authorities Net foreign assets CBS OJwhzch : CIF, managed by CRS Government Net domestic assets Central government (net) 21 Private sector Commercial banks (net) Other items (net) Reserve money Commercial banks Net foreign assets Reserves Domestic credit Central government (net) Private sector Other items (net) Private sector deposits Monetary survey Net foreign assets Domestic credit Central government (net) Private sector 31 Other items (net) Broad money 1,428 1,705 1,925 2,225 2,078 2,250 Currency in circulation 4/ 91 109 107 137 148 138 Deposits 1,337 1,596 1,817 2,088 1,930 2,111 Broad money 16.3 19.4 12.9 15.6 -6.6 8.2 Net foreign assets 36.1 17.1 43.8 13.5 2.0 29.1 Domestic credit -12.0 -3 6 -23.2 -0.5 -5.5 -11 6 Central government (net) -16 7 -10.4 -28.6 -3.9 -8.5 -8.8 Private sector 4.6 6.9 5.5 3.4 3.0 -2.9 Other items (net) -7.7 5.9 -7.8 2.7 -3.1 -9.2 Memorandum items: Currencybroad money (percent) 6.4 6.4 5.6 6.2 7.1 6.1 Reserve money/deposits (percent) 20.3 17.7 14.6 14.2 14.3 11.9 Money multiplier (broad money/reserve money) 5.3 6.0 7.3 7.5 7.5 9.0 Velocity (GDP/period average broad money) 43 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.5 4.9 1,208 1,384 1,928 1,935 2,217 2,467 1,078 1,112 1,452 1,356 1,600 2,091 526 554 705 752 941 1,208 130 271 476 579 617 375 -936 -1,101 - 1,664 -1,639 1,940 -2,216 -771 -995 -1,480 -1,552 -1,765 -1,948 -39 -65 -36 -35 -52 -70 37 43 43 44 42 42 -162 -85 -190 -97 -165 -240 272 282 265 296 277 250 259 328 530 783 546 901 206 175 173 175 139 129 939 1,137 1,198 1,259 1,368 1,327 -33 42 38 36 59 60 972 1,095 1,159 1,223 1,308 1,267 -121 -122 -133 -179 -191 -332 1,283 1,518 1,769 2,038 1,862 2,026 1,467 1,711 2,459 2,718 2,762 3,367 128 78 -318 -328 -449 -691 -804 -953 -1,441 -1,516 -1,706 -1,888 932 1,030 1,123 1,188 1,256 1,197 -168 -84 -216 -165 -235 -427 (In millions of emalangeni) (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise specified) 5/ Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS); and Fund staff estimates. 1/ End-of-year data, except 2001. 2/ Comprises government domestic deposits with the central bank and the counterpart of government (including CIF) external assets in rand. 3/ includes public sector entities other than the government. 4/ Excludes rand in circulation. 51 For 2001, percent change of October 2001 over December 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - ‘T&k 6. Swaziland: Indicators o~Exlemal Vulnerability, 1997.200 1 (In percent of GDP, unless othervase indicated) ,997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Date F~nanalil lndlcators Pubhc sector deht Brohd money (M2, percent chaxge, I Z-month basis) Prlvlrtc sector LTedlt (pcl-cent change, 12.month bans) K&o of domestic credit to GDP Treasuty-hlll yxld l/ Treasuiy-hill yield (real) 2/ External nidlcators Exports (percent change, 12.month haas m U S dollars) 31 Imports (pcrccnt cliaig, 12-month brws m U S dollars) 31 Temls oftrade (percent change, 1Zmonth ha.%) Curent account balance Capltdi and financral account halancc Ofwhich mward portfoho mvestment (debt secuntxx, etc) other mvestment (loans, trade credits, etc) mward forage direct mvestment Net foxlgn assets ofcommeraal banks (mm~llmns ofU S dollars) Cross &ic~al rcsclyes (m mdhons ofU S dollars) Net central bank forelgl cwrency posltmn (m nulhons ofU S dollars) 41 Shor-term forelg, assets ofthe finanaal sector (mmrll~ons ofU S dollars) Shoe-tan1 forelgi lrahlllties of the financ~I sector (m mllhons of LJ S dollars) Net forerelgn cuirency posItIon of the iinanc~ai sector (m rn~lhons ofU S dollars) 51 Oi6cd reserves III months of Imports ofgoods and sev1ces Rat10 of rtserve money to wxxrvts (III percent) Ratio of broad money to reserves (III percent) Total external debt 61 Ofwhich puhhc sector external debt Rat10 of total external debt to exports of goods and sernxs (m percent) 61 Xommal exchange rnte (emalzngem per U S dolhar, permd average) REER depreaatlon (-) (ptnod average, CPI-based) GDP (1x1 nulhons of U S dollars) Nommal exchange rate (em&mgendU S dollar, end-of-pamd) 125 00 105 17 5 13 5 58 -0 3 147 -4 2 -2 9 05 3.1 -2 9 -2 7 01 19 -0 7 -4 9 -5 6 -2 6 -1 5 -3 0 31 104 14 33 00 02 02 00 44 06 23 33 -1 I 113 73 1.5 3516 419 6 4417 365 0 285 5 351 1 363 6 33x 5 1148 1276 9x 2 87 1 Yj 6 1010 1373 R6 4 28 3 104 10 1 143 67 3 90 5 1272 72 1 26 30 30 28 20 3 129 13 2 10 8 1227 93 5 99 4 RI 1 160 21 2 23 2 25 0 124 17 Y 194 19 0 23 6 26 3 30 7 35 0 46 55 61 69 -0 1 -0 8 00 40 114 1 1,436 5 49 17 9 196 21 0 00 00 00 90 5x 57 164 15 3 14 3 13 7 80 86 87 -1 1 22 70 5 1,359 2 59 147 0 13X 0 1,376 7 1,400 8 [ ,225 6 62 76 121 115 Ocrober-01 -2 2 October-01 130 October-Ol x7 September-01 00 S~ptdWOl 356 0 October-01 302 9 October-Ol 93 4 October-01 100 I October-OI 4x October-01 57 7 October-01 36 September-OI x7 October-01 78 5 Ortober-01 56 Jan Dee 200I 05 Jan Dee 2001 December-01 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Figure 1. Swaziland: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators Real Sector, 1995-2001 Domestic investment (in percent of GDP; left scale) (in percent of GDP; left scale) (m percent; right scale) 34 32 30 28 26 30 25 20 15 IO 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Government Finances, 1994/95-2000101 li (In percent of GDP) Expenditures 1994195 1995196 1996l91 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/o 1 External Sector. 1995-2001 import growth Export growth (In percent) (in percent) Current account (in percent of GDP) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 I 34 32 30 28 26 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -I5 -20 Sources: Swazi authorities; and staff estimates. li Fiscal year beginning April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Figure 2. Swaziland and South Africa: Exchange Rate Developments and Inflation, January 1993 - December 2001 Nominal (NEER) and Real (REER) Effective Exchange Rates (Index, 1990=100) i in i 70 60 “\ REER South Africa 1993Ml 1994Ml 1995Ml 1996Ml 1997Ml 1998Ml 1999Ml 2000Ml 2001Ml Consumer Price Inflation (In percent) 20 15 10 South Africa 0 1993Ml 1994Ml 1995Ml 1996Ml 1997Ml 1998Ml 1999Ml 2000Ml 2001Ml 80 60 20 15 10 5 0 Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland; South African Reserve Bank; and IMF. international Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 30 2s 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 3. Swaziland and South Africa: Money Growth and Interest Rates, 1993:Ql-2001:Q3 Growth in M2 (Annual percent change) ^,^ ,,. ,,“.,^. ,,, ,,, _. South Africa l993Ql I994Q I 199501 1996Ql 199741 199841 199YQl 2000Q 1 200141 lntcrcst Rates (Jn pcrccnt) SwaTi prime lending South A Ii-1can p1-mle South African treasury bill (three month) Swan treasury bill (three month) I’)‘)341 lY94Ql 19950 1 199641 199741 199841 199941 2OOOQ 1 200141 lntcrcst Spread Between Lendlng Rate and Deposit Rate (In percent) 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 I 0 199341 1994Q I 1995Ql 1996Ql 199741 199SQl 1999Ql 2000Q 1 2OOlQl Soutli Afi-lea Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland; and South African Reserve Bank. 35 30 25 20 I5 IO 5 0 -5 -10 30 25 20 15 10 s 0 Y R I 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Swaziland: Relations with the Fund (As of January 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined September 22, 1969; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 50.70 Fund holdings of currency 44.15 Reserve position in Fund 6.55 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 6.43 Holdings 2.45 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Proiected Obligations to the Fund: None % Quota 100.0 87.1 12.9 % Allocation 100.0 38.1 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement The lilangeni (plural: emalangeni) continues to be pegged to the South African rand at E 1 = R 1. The intervention currency is the U.S. dollar; exchange rates for the U.S. dollar are based on the floating middle rate of the South African rand against the U.S. dollar. The rate on December 31,200l was E 1 = US$O.O827. VIII. Article IV Consultation Swaziland is on the standard 12-month cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions were held in Mbabane in April 2000. The staff report (SM/00/132; 6/26/00) was considered by the Executive Board on July 19, 2000. IX. Technical Assistance FAD provided technical assistance in 1997 to Swaziland on tax reform. A technical assistance mission visited Swaziland in 1999 to advise on a new income tax bill. In 1998, LEG assisted Swaziland in drafting a new income tax bill and amendments to the Sales Tax Act. A technical assistance mission from MAE visited Swaziland in 1997 to assist in the drafting of the Financial Institutions Act, and, in 1998, MAE provided an advisor to strengthen bank supervision at the Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS). Until January 2000, MAE had provided Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I a long-term general advisor to the CBS. In 1999, MAE also conducted several staff visits to assist in improving the payments system and to advise on the introduction of electronic payments systems. STA sent a mission to Swaziland in 1998 with the objectives of identifying weaknesses in the statistical system and assisting in capacity building, particularly relating to the national accounts and other real sector data. An STA mission visited Swaziland in April 1999 to assist with balance of payments statistics. Another STA mission also visited Swaziland in April 1999 to establish an action plan for improving government finance statistics. X. Resident Representative None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX II Swaziland: Relations with the World Bank Group Since 1962, the World Bank Group has approved 17 IBRD loans, two IDA credits, and seven IFC investments (loans and equity) for a total of US$152.1 million. Total IDA commitments amounted to US$8.4 million; IBRD commitments amounted to US$104.7 million (of which US$80.8 million was disboursed, US$4.4 million was cancelled, and US$l9.6 million remains undisboursed); and IFC commitments amounted to US$38.8 million. The most recent of these operations are an IBRD loan for an Urban Development Project (US$29 million) in 1994, and an IFC loan and equity input of US$3.3 million to Swaziland First Merchant Bank in 1999. Only the IBRD loan for Urban Development is currently disboursing. An IDA credit of US$250,000 was approved for Poverty LIL (Learning and Innovation Loan) that has disboused US$20,000, while US$230,000 remain undisboursed. The IDA/IBRD assistance has been for a broad range of sectors: roads, education, power, water supply/sewerage, rural and urban development, and development finance. The IFC’s investments have been in support of a development finance corporation, agro- industrial enterprises producing sugar and cotton, paper pulp production, and textile/garment production. World Bank Loan/Credit Summary for Swaziland (in millions of U.S. dollars; as of August 31,200l) IBRD IDA TOTAL Original principal 104.8 8.4 113.1 Cancellations 4.4 0.0 4.4 Disbursed 80.8 8.3 89.1 Undisbursed 19.6 0.0 19.6 Repaid 69.0 3.8 72.9 Due IBRDiIDA 9.6 4.5 14.1 IFC commitments Loans Equity 29.7 9.2 Total 38.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36 - APPENDIX III Swaziland: Statistical Issues Deficiencies in the quality of Swaziland’s economic data are pervasive and hamper internal policymaking and effective surveillance. The authorities provide available data to the Fund with a lag of l-2 months, except for the national accounts and international trade data, which are reported with irregular periodicity and with substantial lags. Real sector data National accounts suffer from serious shortcomings. For example, data on GDP by sector of origin are available in current prices only up to 1998; data on GDP by expenditure category at constant prices are not available; and there is no reporting of unemployment data on a regular basis. For national accounts data, missions rely on estimates provided by the Central Statistical Office. Prices The consumer price index (CPI) was significantly revised in 1998. Monthly consumer price data are published by the Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS) with a one-month lag. The CPI is reported for different income groups, although an STA mission has recommended that it would be preferable to focus on the index for the all-income group, as significant distortions characterize the narrower indices. Government finance statistics Fiscal data are provided to AFR staff only during missions and/or following budget announcements. The CBS reports to STA fiscal data for publication in IFS on an irregular basis. After several years, in 2001 the authorities reported data for publication in the GFS Yearbook. A 1999 government finance statistics (GFS) mission delineated the institutional coverage of the public sector and central government for compiling GFS, and recommended that the same institutional table be used by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to compile fiscal data and by the CBS to compile monetary data. By correcting the difference in institutional coverage, the discrepancy between fiscal and monetary data was largely resolved. The mission prepared detailed GFS tables for budgetary central government directly from the MOF’s existing receipts and payments spreadsheet, and recommended that the coverage be expanded to include extrabudgetary funds and local government. Monetary statistics The CBS provides to the Fund, with a lag of l-2 months, its own balance sheet and a composite balance sheet of the commercial banks, as well as the monetary survey. The data are generally good. However, problems with nonperforming loans and the capitalization of interest may distort credit data, and the circulation of large amounts of unverifiable South African rand make data on money difficult to interpret. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37 - APPENDIX III Balance of payments statistics The Central Statistical Office publishes data on foreign trade on a quarterly basis, but the lack of sufficient computer resources continues to result in long lags in the production of trade-especially importdata. Missions use trade data provided by the CBS. The CBS now adheres to a methodology consistent with the Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (fifth edition). However, errors and omissions are large and suggest a need to examine the quality and coverage of data for all components of the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX IV Swaziland: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators l/ Area Population Density 17,364 sq. km. 980,000 56.5 per sq. km. Population characteristics Health Population growth rate 2.5 Life expectancy at birth 46.3 Infant mortality rate (per thousand) 63.9 Total fertility rate (births per woman) 4.5 Urban population (percent of total) 26.1 Population younger than 3 5 years Population per physician (1996) 7,143 Public health expenditure (1998) (percent of GDP) 2.7 HIV-incidence (1999) (percent of population, age 15-49) 25.3 of age (percent of total) (1996) 80.0 Education GDP per capita US$ 1,350 Access to safe water (1999) Percent of population Urban Rural 43.0 41.0 44.0 Labor statistics (in thousands, unless otherwise indicated) Labor force Of which: agriculture (1990, in percent) 371.1 39.5 Formal employment 96 Private sector 64 Public sector 32 Adult literacy rate 79.0 Primary school enrollment rate (1997) (percent of school-age group) 117.1 Poverty indicators (1995) Poorest 40 percent Share of income Per adult equivalent consumption 14 percent USS 230 or less Sources: Ministry of Health; International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2001; Af rlcan Development Indicators, 2000; and Swaziland-Reducing Poverty Through Shared Growth; Central Bank of Swaziland, Annual Report, 1997/98; and United Nations, Demographic Yearbook, 1997. l/ Data refer to 2000, unless otherwise indicated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. International Monetary Fund FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 700 lgth Street, NW March --, 2002 Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Swaziland On March [I I], 2002, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Swaziland.’ Background A loss in external competitiveness and weaker export performance have led to a slowdown in economic activity, with real GDP growth estimated to have declined to 2% percent in 2000 and further to 1% percent in 2001. Consumer price inflation, which had been declining through January 2001, accelerated to about 10% percent by end-2001, mainly stemming from the continuing depreciation of the South African rand (to which the Swazi currency-the lilangeni- is pegged) and a local maize shortage. Unemployment is concentrated among the young and remains high at 25 percent. The estimated incidence of HIV infection has increased to more than one-quarter of the adult population. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Q:\DOC\SH\SWZUvI02\SR\SWZ_Public Information Notice.Doc February 20,2002 (4:28 PM) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX V After several years of fiscal surpluses, the fiscal balance has deteriorated and is expected to move to a deficit of about 4 percent of GDP in 2001102 (April-March). This deterioration in public finances reflects a decline in revenue collections and a steady increase in recurrent expenditures as a share of GDP, including importantly the public sector wage bill. The deficit was financed entirely from foreign and nonbank domestic sources. Monetary conditions-after tightening somewhat in 2000 and in line with developments in South Africa-eased in 2001. The prime lending rate fell by 150 basis points to 12.5 percent by end-2001, but the interest rate on three-month treasury bills in Swaziland remained about 2 percentage points below that in South Africa. The external current account deficit widened from 1% percent of GDP in 1999 to about 3 percent of GDP in 2000. Both exports and imports are estimated to have fallen in value terms by about 3 percent in 2000 and to have continued decreasing in 2001-by about 13 and 19 percent respectively-owing to the global slowdown in economic activity and the depreciation of the lilangeni. The current account deficit is estimated at about 2 percent of GDP in 2001. Net international reserves have remained at about 3 months of import cover at end-October 2001. The government took a number of policy actions in 2000 and 2001. These include a reduction in tax rates and the elimination of the income tax exemption of all public enterprises, and a further relaxation of exchange controls. In particular, the authorities increased in the limits for travel, study, and other allowances along with investment limits for private individuals; removed the approval requirement for interest payments on loans and for capital investments by Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX V nonresidents into domestic companies through the stock market; and eliminated the exchange limit on casino gambling and lottery winnings. Furthermore, the government limited the coverage of the system of import permits to a small negative list of imported items. In addition, amendments to the Central Bank Order and the Financial Institutions Act, which are aimed at strengthening banking supervision and central bank independence, have been submitted to Cabinet for approval. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX V Swaziland: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2001 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. Est. Domestic economy (Annual percentage change) Real GDP 3.2 3.5 2.2 Consumer prices (average) 7.5 5.9 9.9 External economy Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance 21 (in percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance Net official international reserves (in months of imports of goods and nonfactor services) Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 31 Financial variables Total government revenue and grants 4/ Total government expenditure and net lending 41 Overall government balance 41 Change in broad money (in percent) Interest rate (in percent) 51 (In millions of U.S. dollars) I/ 978 937 909 -1,164 -1,068 -1,038 -100 -21 -42 -7.4 -1.5 -3.0 141 19 47 329 314 293 2.8 3.0 2.8 1.5 1.6 1.9 -0.8 0.0 4.0 (In percent of GDP) I/ 29.7 29.7 28.5 28.8 30.9 30.1 1 .o -1.2 -1.5 12.9 15.6 -6.6 12.3 9.3 7.0 Sources: Swazi authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. I/ Unless otherwise indicated. 21 Including transfers. 31 Trade-weighted period average. 41 Fiscal data are shown on a calendar-year basis for comparability. 51 For 12-month time deposits. 1.6 7.5 794 -844 -27 -2.1 12 265 3.2 2.6 0.5 28.3 31.6 -3.2 . . . . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public