DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 0450 SM100/18 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February 2,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Panama-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Panama, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, February 16,200O. Mr. Mackenzie (ext. 38344), Mr. Gomez-Oliver (ext. 38494), and Mrs. Randall (ext. 38615) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, February 10,200O; and to the European Investment Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND PANAMA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Copsultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Panama Approved by Claudio Loser and G. Russell Kincaid February 1,200O Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.......... ,.. . ,........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. II. III. IV. V. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 4 Recent Economic Developments ..................................................................................... 6 Policy Discussions ........................... ................................................................................ 12 A. Fiscal Policy ......................................................................................................... 12 B. Financial System .................................................................................................. 17 C. External Issues ..................................................................................................... 18 D. Statistical Issues.. ................................................................................................ .20 E. The Environment ................................................................................................. 20 Medium-Term Prospects .................................................................................................. 21 Staff Appraisal ................................................................................................................. 22 Tables 1. Quarterly Performance Criteria Under the Extended Arrangement ................................. 25 2. Selected Economic Indicators and Medium-Term Projections, 1995-2004.. ................. .27 3. Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector ................................................. 29 4. Summary Operations of the Central Government ............................................................ 31 5. Monetary Accounts .......................................................................................................... 32 6. Balance of Payments Projections, 1995-2000.. .............................................................. .3 3 7. Medium-Term Balance of Payments Projections ............................................................ . 5 8. Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt, 1995-2004 ........................................... 36 9. Indicators of the External Position and Financial Vulnerability.. .................................. ..3 7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 10. Changes in Banking Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.........................I........... 38 11. Resolutions Issued by the Superintendency of Banks Since its Incorporation in June 1998 ,.,...............,........................................................,. 40 Boxes 1. A Poverty Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2. Economic Implications and Accounting Impact of the Reversion of the Canal Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3. Developments in Bank Regulations and Supervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.. 7 2. Exchange Rate Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..............I.......... 9 3. Monetary Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 _ Appendices I. Fund Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..f.................................................................... 41 II. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 III. Financial Relations with the World Bank Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 IV. Financial Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank *.....,............................ 48 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Real GDP growth is projected to have declined from 4.1 percent in 1998 to 3% percent in 1999. Inflation remained in the neighborhood of 1 L/z percent per annum, and the external current account recorded a deficit of close to 14 percent of GDP, slightly higher than the 1998 deficit. The increase in the current account deficit since 1997 is in part due to the decline in net exports of the Colon Free Zone to neighboring economies, and in part due to the impact of an investment boom on capital goods imports. It is largely financed by foreign equity. The government did succeed in reducing the public sector deficit from 3.0 percent of GDP in 1998 to 1.7 percent in 1999, but exceeded the target of the revised program by 0.7 percent of GDP. In consequence, the fiscal performance criteria of Panama’s program, which has been supported by an extended arrangement were not observed during 1999. Discussions with the new administration, which assumed office in September 1999 centered around the appropriate stance of fiscal policy and the significance of the large current account deficit. The authorities affirmed their desire to revive the process of fiscal consolidation, which had been sidetracked by election-related expenditure in late 1998 and 1999. The staff recommended that the authorities adopt a target of balance for the public sector’s operations in 2000. This goal could be achieved basically by restraining capital expenditures, which had been boosted during the pre-election period. Maintaining a balanced position in succeeding years would bring down the ratio of gross public debt (and net debt) to GDP quite rapidly, enhancing Panama’s attractiveness as a destination for investment and lowering its borrowing costs. This strategy would also help reduce the external current account imbalance and reduce any risk of pressures on domestic wages and prices. It would be greatly facilitated by further reforms of social security, expenditure control, and the tax system. The substantial current account deficit increases the importance of ensuring that both domestic and foreign savings are financing productive investment. It is particularly important that the authorities proceed swiftly with measures to strengthen financial regulation. The recent rapid growth in credit, and consumer credit in particular, might have weakened banks’ balance sheets. In the course of the national debate on the role of the Trust Fund (the repository for the proceeds of past privatizations) there have been calls for using the fund’s assets to finance social expenditure. Their use to buy back external debt, as advocated by the Finance Ministry would be a far better strategy, and would allow a permanent increase in social expenditure from the savings it would realize. The authorities are in the process of defining their structural reform policies. Progress on this front will be a necessary ingredient for a reactivation of the extended arrangement (or a new arrangement). It was also important that the authorities reaffirm their commitment to trade liberalization by adopting a schedule that would reverse relatively quickly the recent increases in tariffs on certain foodstuffs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. INTI~~DUCTION 1. The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions with Panama were held in Panama City from November 8-23,1999. The staff team met with the Ministers of Economy and Finance (MEF), Labor and Agriculture, with the General Manager of the Banco National de Panama (BNP), and with senior officials from the Treasury; the Office of the Controller General, the Social Security Agency, and other central government agencies. The staff team comprised Messrs. Mackenzie (Head), Bindley-Taylor, Gomez-Oliver, Keller, and Bail&, Ms. Torres, and Ms. Karkas (assistant), all from WHD. Mr. Macia, Assistant to the Executive Director for Panama, participated in the final discussions, 2. On December 16, 1998, the Executive Board concluded the second review under the extended arrangement (SDR 120 million, or 5 8 percent of quota) that it had approved on December 10, 1997. In concluding the second review, Executive Directors remarked that further progress with structural reform would be very important in promoting sustained growth. They welcomed the targeted reduction in the public sector deficit. A policy of moderate public sector wage settlements and measures to control social security system expenditure were seen as important means to this end. In addition, Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to improve bank supervision and strengthen the regulatory framework of the financial system. 3. The fiscal program went off track in late 1998 because of expenditure overruns. As a result, the performance criterion on the overall balance of the nonfinancial public sector for end-December 1998 was not observed (Table 1). Some corrective measures were adopted in early 1999, but these were insufficient to bring the fiscal program back on track, and performance criteria for March, June, and September 1999 were also missed. Panama has not drawn under the program since October 1998. 4. The administration of President Mireya Moscoso assumed office on September 1, 1999, following a post-electoral transition period of four months. The President’s platform committed the government to eradicate, or at least greatly reduce poverty, within a span of five years. According to the World Bank, some 37 percent of Panamanians live below the poverty line (Box 1). In the course of the Article IV discussions, the staff discussed with the authorities various measures that might put the Fund-supported program back on course. Understandings could not be reached on a suitable package at this stage because the newly- elected authorities were still working out the specific measures of their structural reform program. 5. Panama provides core statistics to the Fund and publishes a comprehensive set of data and a calendar for the release of key indicators. The authorities have received technical assistance from the Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) on national accounts and balance of payments statistics, and have improved the timeliness and quality of the data in both areas, though shortcomings remain. Regarding the balance of payments, the authorities have Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1. Panama: A Poverty Profile1 Poverty remains pervasive among Panamanians, despite the country’s relatively high income per capita (USS3,300 in 1998). The poverty lines for Panama calculated by the World Bank categorize persons with an ammal income below USS905 as poor and those with less than USS519 as extremely poor. went along these lines reveals that over 1 million Panamani am-37 percent of the country’s populatior+live below the poverty line. Gf this group, about one-half live in extreme poverty. Three quarters of Panama’s poor live in Ural area The prevalence and the depth of poverty varies sign&antly across the country. Poverty rates are lowest in the urban provinces of Panama and Colon and tend to reach each their highest levels in the nual regions furthest away from the capital. Poverty is most pronounced in indigenous arcas. Here, about 95 percent of the residents are poor, and no less than 86 percent live in extreme poverty. At the same time, fertility rates in these areas are high. Thus, in the absence of any progress in poverty reduction, the number of the poor as a share of Panama’s total population will rise. Rural poverty is strongly related to the unequal distribution of land. Although they account for two-thirds of the rural population, the poor only own one-third of the land Land ownership is highly concentrated: the Gini coefficient for total land owned is 77. Further, only one-third of all owned agricultural land is properly titled and 84 percent of the land is owned by families who are not poor. The lack of property titles makes it very di.Sicult for the poor to obtain credit, since they cannot offer satisfactory collateral. The urban poor constitute about 15 percent of the total urban population. Close to 40 percent of the urbau poor live in the Panama City/San Miguelito area Although poverty is not widespread or deep in urban areas, the World Bank’s analysis points out that many city dwellers live just above the poverty line and therefore must be considered vulnerable. Children arc the most affected group among the poor. One-half of all Panamanian chiidren he in poverty, and over 16 percent of all children under five suffer from mahmtrition. Again, the situation is particularly severe in indigenous areas, where every second child is malnourished. 9hisboxsummali zes some findings of a comprehensive two-volume ‘Panumu-Poverty Assessment” Report by the World Bank in 1999, and also draws on the MIT’s document “Perfll y Carucferfsficus de ios Pobres en Punum&, ” both published in 1999. The latter includes a new poverty map of Panama constructed by the MEF in order to show the regional dimension of poverty in Panama. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- signaled their interest in additional technical assistance to improve the accounting of transactions involving the former Canal Zone. With respect to government finance statistics, there is an ongoing project to establish an integrated financial administration system (SIAFPA).’ However, the system’s coverage of the central government’s accounts needs to be generalized; its expenditure coverage improved; and its institutional coverage extended to the rest of the public sector. Finally, the lag with which the consolidated banking system’s balance sheet is provided needs to be reduced (Appendix II). 6. Panama has accepted the obligations of Article VIII and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 7. Real GDP is estimated to have grown by 3% percent in 1999, compared with 4.1 percent in 1998 (Figure 1 and Table 2).2 The sectors contributing most to the growth of aggregate supply were construction, financial intermediation, and electricity, which was recovering from the effects of drought. A decline in the activity of the Colon Free Zone (whose Spanish acronym is ZLC) was the main drag on growth3 8. Growth was driven by domestic demand, which was buoyed by investments in the reverted areas (i.e., those areas of the Canal Zone that have recently been transferred to Panama), much of it financed through foreign direct investment, and taking the form of construction. A strong increase in credit-financed purchases of consumer goods also contributed. The overall deficit of the public sector declined from 3.0 percent of GDP in 1998 to 1.7 percent of GDP in 1999 (Tables 3 and 4), while bank credit to the private sector increased by 16 percent in the 12 months ending December 1999 (Table 5). 9. The external current account deficit (including current official transfers), having increased from 6.9 percent of GDP in 1997 to 13.3 percent in 1998, rose somewhat further in 1999 to 13.8 percent of GDP. Most of the 7 percentage points of GDP increase in the deficit ’ SIAFPA stands for Sistema Integrado de Administracidn Financiera en Panam6. 2 National accounts statistics are not yet available for the fourth quarter of 1999, and the estimates for the first three quarters include only the supply side. Real GDP in the first half of 1999 was 3.5 percent higher than real GDP in the first half of 1998. GDP in the third quarter of 1999 was 3.3 percent higher than in the corresponding period of 1998. 3 The Colon Free Zone is a center for repackaging and light processing that enjoys special tax treatment. In 1998, merchandise imports amounted to US$5.0 billion and exports US$S.S billion. Its accounts are presented here on a net basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Figure 1, Panama: Selected Economic Indicators REAL SECTOR (~pcrccnt) iS5SRedGDPGmd -1 J 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 PTJELIC SECTOR OPERATIONS IIn Percent of GDP) 33 32 -c3mll~(xi&hts) 28 27 26 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 SAVINGANDINVHSTMENT (In pucmt of GDP) 26 - 6-r 60 1997 1998 PUBLIC DEBT (In percent of GDP) -Net pohlic debt ---Netextend publicdebt --...-NdW& public debt -..m-------.__. ..-’ .--------- -1-..- --......-* 19% 1991 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Office of the Comptroller General; Ministry of Planning and Fxonomic Policy, and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- from 1997-1999 is attributable to a strong increase in final domestic demand, mainly investment.4 The economic difficulties in neighboring countries also contributed by bringing about a substantial drop in net exports from the ZLC (Table 6).5 The current account deficit was mostly financed by foreign direct investment, which is estimated to have averaged 12.4 percent of GDP in 1998-99. The overall balance of payments is estimated to have recorded a deficit of US$ll4 million, or 1.2 percent of GDP (Table 6) in 1999, compared with a deficit of US$224 million in 1 998.6 The real effective exchange rate appreciated by 4.6 percent in the first eleven months of 1999, reflecting the appreciation of the U.S. dollar (Panama’s currency) against the major currencies’ (Figure 2). 10. In the 12 months ending in August 1999, the rate of unemployment declined f?om 13.6 percent to 11.6 percent. Data on the behavior of wages in 1999 are not yet available.* The rate of inflation in the 12 months ended December 1999 was 1.5 percent, compared with a rate of 1.4 percent for the 12 months ended Decemberl998. (Table 2). 11. Although the overall public sector deficit is estimated to have declined from 3 .O percent of GDP in 1998 to 1.7 percent in 1999, it overshot the revised program’s targeted deficit of 1 percent of GDP (Table 3). The central government’s target was missed by a similar margin (Table 4). Net financing from external sources exceeded the public sector’s financing requirement, so that net lending by the banking system to the public sector declined. The failure to achieve the overall public sector deficit target (which occurred 4 More precisely, most of the increase in the current account deficit from 1997 to 1999 is attributable to the decline of 6.1 percentage points in the private sector’s savings-investment balance (Figure 1 and Table 2). 5 Specifically, ZLC exports to Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, and Venezuela fell in 1999 because of income declines and/or real exchange rate depreciations in those countries. Exports to Central America were affected by the dislocation caused by Hurricane Mitch at end-1998. 6 The sum of the changes in the net foreign asset position of the BNP, changes in arrears, rescheduling and changes in Panama’s net position with the Fund is defined as the overall balance of payments. . ’ The Balboa, whose value is fixed at one to the U.S. dollar, is used as a unit of account. Only coins, with the same denomination and shape as U.S. coins, are issued. * In 1998, the average economy-wide wage declined by 0.7 percent. An increase of 4.2 percent in public sector wages was more than offset by a decline in private sector wages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- despite the government’s efforts to reduce capital outlays in the first quarter of 1999), was attributable to unbudgeted severance payments amounting to 0.6 percent of GDP and mid- year election-related capital spending, which resulted in central government capital expenditure exceeding its target by 2.7 percent of GDP.’ These overruns offset a stronger- than-programmed increase in public sector revenue, which was mainly the result of large unprogrammed profits transfers from the BNP (1 percentage point of GDP).” Net public sector debt excluding the Trust Fund in relation to GDP is estimated to have risen from 47.8 percent at end-1998 to 53.0 percent at end-1999 mainly because of a stock adjustment to the public debt entailed by the issuance of securities to recognize the acquired rights of persons who had moved to the new privatized pension scheme (SIACAP) from the civil service complementary pension scheme.” 12. With the U.S. dollar as its currency, Panama’s interest rates move closely with U.S. rates, and there is no scope for an independentmonetary policy. In the first three quarters of 1999, the base commercial lending rate in Panama was unchanged at 9.9 percent per annum, and the differential with the U.S. prime rate narrowed slightly from 2.1 percent to 1.8 percent during this period. Lending by the banking system to the private sector grew by 16 percent in the 12 months ending in September 1999 (Figure 3). The rapid growth of private sector credit more than offset a decline in the banking system’s net lending to the public sector and a decline in net foreign assets (US$6 16 million), resulting in a growth in broad money of approximately 12 percent in the 12 months through September 1999, a rate somewhat greater than that of nominal GDP (Table 5). 13. The pace of structural reform slackened in late 1998 and 1999. In particular, no additional enterprises or institutions were privatized. The privatized complementary pension fund for civil servants did begin operation, however, and progress was achieved in the ’ The severance payments, which were made to employers of privatized enterprises, had not been included in the 1999 budget because their timing was uncertain. lo These transfers represent profits on operations in 1999 that are expected to recur in the future. The current policy of the BNP is to maintain its capital base at its December 1998 level of US$SOO million. Once that level of capitalization is reached, all net income is transferred to the government of Panama (the sole shareholder). I1 The debt issued to recognize these acquired rights amounted to US$300 million. To the extent that the issue of the pension-related debt simply recognizes an implicit but previously existing obligation of the government, it does not increase the effective debt burden. It is not included in central government expenditure (and in fact will not lead to an increase in pension payments). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Figure 3. Panama: Monetary Accounts Interest Rate Strnctnre (Simple average per annum) 6 - - - Difference bstwscniho U.S. prime sndths PawnSS ccaPneacialemdirglatbs 4 25 20 15 10 5 0 Private Sector Credit & Liabilities to the Private Sector (12-month change in relation to Iabilities to the private sector at the beginning of the period) -Priva!n acdor aedit - - - Liabditiestotheprivatesectnf _____--_-_---______-____________________----------------------- ------- Sources: National Bank of Panama; Savings Bank; and the Superintendencia of Banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- drafting of financial regulations, and in the development of the automated public financial information system, SIAFPA. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 14. The Article IV consultation discussions centered around the appropriate stance for fiscal policy and the significance of the external current account deficit. The relaxation of the fiscal stance in 1998 halted the process of fiscal consolidation. In addition, it contributed to the strong growth in domestic demand, and hence to the marked increase in the external current account deficit. The increase in the external current account deficit results mainly from the current difficulties of the ZLC, and the increased private sector investment opportunities created by the reversion (Box 2), however.” It can be expected to reverse itself as households increase their saving to prevent an excessive increase in indebtedness, the remaining investment opportunities in the reverted areas are exploited, and activity in the ZLC recovers. 15. During the discussions, the authorities expressed their commitment to medium-term fiscal consolidation, and to a program of structural reform. Fiscal consolidation, among other benefits, would lower Panama’s debt servicing costs. They explained that they were engaged in developing a more detailed plan for action in the areas of structural weakness identified by the staff Once their proposals had taken a more definite shape, they wished to explore with the staff the possibilities of Fund support. A. Fiscal Policy 16. The authorities stated that the overshooting of 0.7 percent in the overall public sector deficit in 1999 was a matter of concern. They did note, however, that the new administration had not introduced any new expenditure programs or initiatives in the last four months of 1999. At the same time, there was little the new administration could have done to reduce the deficit in calendar 1999, given the date at which it assumed office. 17. The budget for the year 2000, which was approved by the legislative assembly on December 3 1, 1999 embodies no significant changes in expenditure policy (e.g. a general ‘* The transfer, or reversion, which took place on December 3 1,1999, is the culmination of the process set in motion by the Carter-Tonijos Treaty of 1977. That process entailed a substantial transfer of land and other productive assets-one that had gathered pace recently-although it also resulted in the loss of the income generated by the presence of the U.S. armed forces in the country. The reversion also has implications for balance of payments POP) and national income accounting+.g., the impact on the BOP of the transfer of ownership of the Panama Canal Commission from the U.S. to Panama (see Box 2). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-13- Box 2. Panama: Economic Implications and Accounting Impact of the Reversion of the Canal Zone Panama officially assumed responsibility for canal operations on December 3 1, 1999. The process of transferring the Canal Zone and its infrastructure and buildings began in 1979, but intensified in the last three years. In all, 95,000 hectares and 7,000 buildings and installations have been transferred. In 1993, the authorities decided to privatize all reverting properties by means of sales, concessions or rentals. An autonomous agency, the Interoceanic Region Authority (ARI in Spanish) was charged with planning, coordinating, and selecting programs and specific projects for the development of the reverted areas. Economic implications of the reversion The reversion of the Canal Zone has stimulated an increase in private investment, particularly in new ports, in order to capitalire on Panama’s location. It has also encouraged investment in the other three main development priorities in the reverted areas: housing, industry, and tourism. Private investment in the reverted areas increased from close to zero in 1997 to nearly 2 percent of GDP in 1998 and 1999. Investment commitments for the next five years have been estimated to exceed USSl billion, mainly in tourism (VW50 million) and in additional port facilities (USWO million). The expected increase in economic activity in the reverted areas has also led to new investment in roads, telecommunications, and in other services. The increase in investment has contributed to the increase in the external current account deficit. Most of it is direct foreign investment. Purchases of goods and services by the U.S. Department of Defense in the canal areas (estimated to amount to USSl15 million in 1999) were included among the exports of services in the balance of payments of Panama, and the wages and salaries paid to Panamanians working on the bases (US%40 million in 1999) were included in labor income. The transfer of the Canal and the closing of the last bases means that income from these sources drops to zero, a loss of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2000. Accounting impaet Panamanian statistics (national accounts and the balance of payments) do not yet reflect the transfers of the reverted areas and their assets that have taken place since 1979, partly because of the valuation problems involved. One solution would be to treat the transfer of the physical property as an import, which would tend to increase the current account deficit, financed by an increase in capital transfers. The change in the responsibility for canal operations on December 31, 1999 from the Panama Canal Commission (PCC),‘ which is considered a foreign enterprise, to the Panama Canal Authority (PCA), which is a public Panamanian entity, will increase the size of the public sector, increasing recorded public expenditure and investment. This change will also have an accounting impact on the balance of payments, without having an impact on the overall balance. On the one hand, it would eliminate from the balance of payments the direct investment of the PNCYPCA (represented by its reinvested earnings), which would reduce the surplus in the capital and financial account. On the other hand, it would also imply an offsetting reduction of outfIows of investment income (the same earnings), which would reduce the deficit in the current account. ’ Comptroller General: National Income Statistics: “ Total de proyectos contratados y en ejecucidn” ’ IRA, The Panama Canal areas: August 1997. 3 The authorities have asked the Fund for technical assistance on that subject. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- wage increase for the civil service) or in tax policy. In addition, public sector investment outside the central government is held to a relatively low level. Subsequently, the authorities stated that they planed to submit a modified budget proposal to the assembly that would add some $200 million (2 percent of GDP) in expenditure on social projects to the approved budget.13 The modified proposal does not include either compensating reductions in other expenditure, or discretionary revenue measures. Nonetheless, measures that would increase tax revenue by broadening the base of the tax system are under consideration. 18. The modified budget proposal-which has still to receive legislative approval- would result in a deficit for the central government of 5.0 percent of GDP, so-me 2 percentage points higher than the estimated outturn for 1999. Similarly, the overall public sector deficit implied by the proposal is 4.2 percent, some 2% percentage points higher than the outturn for 1999. The increase in the deficit at both levels of government essentially corresponds to the amount of the additional expenditure on social projects. - 19. Assuming real GDP growth of 4 percent and an inflation rate of 1.5 percent, the projected deficit entails an increase-in the ratio of net public debt to GDP from 53.0 percent at end-1999 to 54.3 percent at end-2000. Consequently, the modified budget proposal would not lead to the further consolidation of the fiscal position that the Fund-supported program had envisaged. The staff observed that, quite apart from the impact of the additional social expenditure on the deficit in 2000, the overall public sector deficit in relation to GDP was likely to grow over time, mainly because of the impact of demographic trends on health and pension expenditure. The CSS enjoyed a cash surplus at present, but the impact of pension plan maturation, increases in life expectancy, and demand for medical services meant that its expenditures were likely to grew more rapidly than GDP, and to outpace the growth of revenues. The ratio of pensioners to plan contributors has been projected to increase from one in six in 1998 to one in three in 2020. The system is rnnning a sizeable actuarial deficit, and payroll tax revenues of the pension component are already insufficient to finance current pension expenditure. 20. The staff also observed that the current fiscal stance might be insufficiently tight in light of the strength of private sector demand. The external current account deficit had remained high in 1999 and unemployment had declined for the first time in several years. I4 l3 The expenditure is devoted mainly to projects to improve the water supply, single-family dwelling construction, school building and repair, development of a national cadastre, road construction and maintenance. I4 It was hard to analyze the likelihood that domestic demand might be pushing up the prices of nontraded goods and services, given the delays with which quarterly GDP figures are produced and the problems interpreting labor force data. The labor force survey from which the unemployment rate is calculated treats a category of discouraged worker as if he or she (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Although there was as yet no sign that nontraded goods prices were increasing relative to traded goods prices, there could be latent pressure for such increases. 21. On the basis of these considerations, the staff recommended that a revised budget be prepared with a deficit for the central government of 1.3 percent of GDP, 1.7 percentage points lower than the approved budget’s figure. The staffs budget proposal would be enough to balance the overall public sector position, given the structural surplus that characterizes the rest of the public sector.]’ Most of the adjustment would take the form of restraint of investment expenditure, which had been inflated in 1999 by the political calendar. Restraint might also require cutting back the proposed additional expenditure. 22. Recent efforts at structural reform of Panama’s public sector have concentrated on privatization, an area in which considerable progress has been made. The public enterprise sector is now relatively small, and consists mainly of public utilities. However, the staff noted that the central government continues to experience problems with expenditure control; the structure and administration of the tax system need improvement; while the social security system suffers from an actuarial, if not a cash flow, imbalance. Thus, the staff emphasized that further progress with reform in these areas was necessary. 23. Efforts to improve the techniques of expenditure control have continued. The SIAFPA expenditure module now covers all the central government’s ministries and agencies. In principle, the system allows expenditure to be tracked from the initial appropriations to the checks issued stage. Despite the system’s impressive features, some expenditure is escaping recording. The staff underscored how important it was that the system cover all transactions. Progress in the development of the module that tracks financial assets and liability accounts had been lagging, and needed to be accelerated. 24. With regard to taxation, the authorities noted that they were studying the recommendations of a report prepared by the Centro Iberoamericano de Administracibn Tributaria (CIAT) on the reform of the tax system and its administration. Tax rates, other than those on labor income are low in Panama, but the system is complicated unnecessarily by over 50 low-yielding nuisance taxes, and its base is narrow. This is especially true of sales taxation. The value-added tax (VAT) exempts all personal service and all food products, and the tax rate is only 5 percent-the lowest general rate of any VAT in the world. A broader based VAT levied at a higher, but still moderate, rate (e.g., 8-l 0 percent) would not entail significant distortive effects. Tax administration is not very effective, especially in the case of were looking for work. This treatment may bias the measure of the level of unemployment, although not necessarily its rate of change. l5 A revised budget would be necessary if it was not possible to achieve the proposed target by limiting the release of budgetary appropriations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- the VAT, in part because of the tax department’s limited budget. The authorities agreed that there was scope to broaden the base of the VAT and increase administrative effectiveness, and, as noted, are considering measures to broaden the base of the tax system as a whole. 25. The social security system covers the risks of income loss due to old age, disability, retirement, and death. It also provides directly medical and health care services to system participants and their families. l6 The retirement pension, which accounts for most of the system’s pension benefits is quite generous. For example, after 15 years of contributions, men at the age of 62 years and women at the age of 57 qualify for a pension that is equal to 60 percent of the average of their seven highest income years. The replacement ratio rises by 1% percent for each additional year of contributions. Consequently, a 62 year-old man with 30 years of contributions enjoys a replacement ratio of over 78 percent. The pension is subject to a cap of US$1,500 per month, but this is not really a constraining limit in an economy with a monthly per capita income of US$250. With the average pension benefit now close to 90 percent of the average wage, the staff maintained that a gradual reduction in the replacement ratio could take place without jeopardizing the income security of elderly Panamanians. Increased efforts at health cost containment could also be necessary, given the increase in demand for health care that is likely to result from the aging of Panama’s population. 26. A number of nonfinancial public enterprises remain in the public domain, notably the Water Company (IDAAN), and Tocumen Airport. IDAAN does manage to achieve a cash flow surplus, but problems with billing, accounts receivable, and system leakage mean that its finances have not been strong enough to maintain and increase its capital stock and infrastructure, which have progressively deteriorated. Part of IDAAN’s deficit reflects an informal policy to subsidize water consumption in poor neighborhoods. The authorities are well aware of the need to improve IDAAN’s financial condition, and explained that they are in the process of preparing a plan to rational& its operations. They are also considering the further step of privatizing both IDAAN and the airport. 27. The success of the privatization campaign has led to an accumulation of privatization proceeds in the Trust Fund equal to about 15 percent of GDP. The law proscribes encroachments on the Fund’s capital, but allows the income generated by the Fund to be used to pay for social programs, but no other expenditure. In the midst of a national debate on the appropriate use of the resources of the Trust Fund in social development, proposals have been made to allow the use of the Fund’s capital to finance social expenditure.17 The I6 See Chapter I of Panama: Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix for a more detailed description of the system. I7 On December 3, 1999, Standard and Poor’s revised its outlook for Panama from stable to negative, citing among its reasons a concern that the Trust Fund’s assets would be used to finance additional expenditure. Panama’s credit ratings were not changed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- authorities have decided that the capital should not be used to finance such expenditure but instead to repay external debt since the resources saved by reducing the relatively high interest charges on external debt could be devoted to current social expenditure programs.‘* The staff supported this position, but noted that a change of the Fund’s statutes to allow it to repay debt should not open the door to the financing of current expenditures. The authorities have subsequently issued a decree that would permit the use of the proceeds of the impending sale of the state’s share in a telecom company, Cable and Wireless to finance social expenditure. B. Financial System 28. The staff observed that the increase in competition among banks in the consumer loan market that has occurred in the past two years might have entailed some reduction in profit margins as well as some deterioration in the quality of bank assets. In 1996, nonperforming loans averaged around 4 percent of total assets; by June 1999 the ratio had risen to 7.3 percent. In addition, the banking system was going through a period of consolidation in which retail banks were being absorbed into larger financial conglomerates. Prior to 1996 only one merger of two banks (in 1992) had taken place; in the last three years, however, 28 banks have merged to form 11 new entities. 29. The staff took the view that the recent changes in the banking environment, and notably the rapid increase in credit, especially consumer loans, only added to the importance of the work under way at the new Superintendency to complete a sound regulatory framework (see Box 3 on bank supervision and Tables 10 and 11) and the need to ensure its effective application. It was important that the Superintendency issue the pending regulations on asset quality and liquidity (Table 1 l), and that it ensure the timely availability of indicators of bank soundness. The authorities agreed fully, but added that the personal loan market in Panama was not unduly risky, since these loans were generally extended to salary earners working at established enterprises or businesses (e.g., the Panama Canal Commission), who were authorized by the employee to deduct and remit installment payments to the bank. 30. The Agricultural Development Bank and the National Mortgage Bank are public financial institutions that perform essentially quasi-fiscal functions, by providing highly subsidized lending to farmers and prospective homeowners, respectively. Both institutions have a large portfolio of nonperforming loans and are generally considered to be inefficiently run. There is also concern about how well their subsidies are targeted. The Fund staff have maintained for some time that the social functions these banks perform should be carried out directly by the government, and reflected in explicit budgetary subsidies, with loan ‘* The Fund staff estimate that each US$lOO million devoted to repaying external debt would realize annual net interest savings of about US$6.7 million (0.1 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-18- administration being turned over to the commercial banks. The ultimate disposition of these two institutions is still under consideration, C. External Issues 31. The statf noted that the large current account deficits of 1998 and 1999, being fmanced largely by direct investment, had not entailed a significant buildup in indebtedness to nonresidents. Nonetheless, it was very important that the increase in investment that had taken place be productive. The shrinking of profit margins of the ZLC and the decline in the volume of its exports had contributed to the increased deficits. The ZLC’s profit margins and markets could be expected to recover over time, although the immediate outlook was uncertain. 32. The reversion of the Canal and the final withdrawal of the U.S. military presence results in the loss of income from purchases of goods and services by the military bases and from employment of Panamanians on the bases. These inflows have been falling for several years, however, and their elimination in 2000 will entail a decline in net current inflows, other things equal, of about US$160 million, or less than 2 percent of GDP. Pension payments by the U.S. government to Panamanians who worked in the Canal Zone will continue, although the number of recipients will begin to decline. Given the scale of the transfer of assets to Panama that has occurred, and the investment taking place in the reverted areas, this income loss should be more than made up by the income generated by the resulting additions to the country’s capital stock (see Box 2). 33. Panama’s external tariff regime was substantially liberalized by a series of reforms between 1992 and 1998. Panama joined the WTO in 1996, and by 1998, all import quotas had been replaced by tariffs. The WTO agreement established a maximum tariff of 40 percent for nearly all products, with a few products retaining relatively wide bands. As of the beginning of 1998, however, Panama had reduced tariffs to no more than 15 percent for all products except rice, milk products, sugar, and cars. In October 1999, as already noted, the authorities raised tariffs on a group of foodstuffs, including rice, whose tariff was increased to 130 percent, the maximum allowed under the WTO agreement.19 The staffs view was that the tariff increases would raise the domestic prices of the protected products, and despite the concentration of poverty in the rural areas, would reduce the real incomes of most poor l9 Additional increases in the tariff rates on a number of foodstuffs, including margarine, cooking oils and salt, to the maximum agreed with the WTO were announced at end-January. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 3. Panama: Developments in Bank Regulation and Supervision Since the passage of the Banking Law of 1970, Panama has operated a banking system based on the free movement of funds across international borders, protected by strong privacy laws and sheltered from the payment of domestic and international taxes. The fact that the U.S. dollar is Panama’s legal currency eliminates the possibility of exchange risk, making Panama a haven for institutions and individuals seeking a relatively safe, tax-free environment. The banking system in 1999 consisted of approximately 90 banks (including two state banks), of which 24 were international license banks and 55 general license banks. The international license banks are generally fore&n-owned banks or branches of foreign-owned banks whose activities are restricted to offshore and cross-border financial transactions. The general license banks, which are owned by both domestic and foreign investors conduct business both in the local and international markets. Panama has never had a central bank or similar institution to act as a lender of last resort, in the event of a banking crisis, and there is no deposit insurance scheme.’ In these circumstances the domestic banking system has relied on self regulation, beginning in 1970, in the form of the National Banking Commission (NBC). The NBC supervised the banking system, set reserve requirements and prudential limits and regulated interest rates. This system was backed by conservative lending practices including having an explicit guarantor for every consumer loan, short repayment periods (3-5 years) for personal credit, and the deduction of debt service payments directly from the borrowers’ salary. In spite of the relatively efficient functioning of the NBC, Panama’s regulatory framework has not kept up with the new regulatory standards being set in the international community. The secrecy laws impeded proper supervision, reporting requirements were not standard&d and not always adhered to, and the enforcement powers of the NBC were weak. In 1998 the authorities, aided by the World Bank, began a thorough reform of bank regulation and supervision (Table 10). The Superintendency of Banks was created effective June 1998 and replaced the NBC. The new body is an independent organization with greeter powers of supervision and enforcement, including the power to remove directors and liquidate banks.2 All banks are now subject to regular (annual) inspections (which will also cover affiliated financial groups and holding companies) and must present audited accounts (both consolidated and unconsolidated) biannually to the Superintendency. Within limits of existing privacy laws, all banks must make their latest fmancial information available to the public. In September 1998, the Superintendency signaled to the banking system its intention that all banks adopt the Basle standards with respect to liquidity and capital adequacy ratios, and the reporting of financial transactions, beginning January 1999 (Table 11). Banks now report to the Superintendency in a uniform format in contrast to the variety of reporting formats in the recent past. New standards have also been set for capital adequacy ratios (8 percent of risk-weighted assets) and the minimum capital requirement to incorporate a bank raised from US$l million to USSlO million. To control credit concentration, the new law limits loans to single borrowers to 25 percent of capital fnnds and unsecured loans to related parties to 5 percent of capital. The Superintendency expects that by end-1999 all banks will have adhered to the capital adequacy ratio (75 percent were at ~ the required level at December 1998). The new deadlines for this standard and for conformity with respect to reporting of financial information have been subsequently shifted to November 2000. All banks are expected to meet the new liquidity requirements by the first quarter of 2000, and the limits set for credit to related parties and unsecured lending by 2002. ’ The state-owned National Bank of Panama is one of the largest domestic banks and serves as the financial agent of the government and as the clearing house for the banking system. ’ The National Banking Commission, though it was financed by contributions made directly from individual banks, was considered to be a department of the Ministry of Planning and the Economy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- families.20 Consequently, the staff recommended that the changes be reversed over the next few years. D. Statistical Issues 34. Panama is a pilot country for the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) exercise for the Spanish-speaking Western Hemisphere countries, and its economic and financial statistics are generally satisfactory. Nonetheless, there are some problem areas (as noted), with the national accounts being most in need of further improvement. For example, there is some reason to believe that sampling techniques and deflation procedures bias real growth rates downwards, and the demand side of the accounts needs to be developed.2’ Government financial statistics are quite comprehensive, but there are problems with expenditure recording and the reconciliation of financial flows with the balance from above the line. The authorities concurred with this assessment, and have subsequently expressed interest in further technical assistance. The lack of data on nonfinancial private sector debt in the data set on the international investment position is a serious omission that needs to be remedied. E. The Environment 35. Panama is character&d by remarkable bio-diversity. Environmental degradation, in addition to its effects on the economy-the Canal and tourism in particular-is, in consequence a threat to the country’s patrimony. The National Environmental Authority (ANAM) was created in 1997 to safeguard the environment, and the law creating it gives it quite broad powers of regulation and enforcement, although the regulations that are necessary to implement this framework remain to be completed. 36. In addition to ANAM, the Panama Canal Authority (PCA) (the successor to the Panama Canal Commission) is expressly charged with safeguarding the Canal area watershed, given the vital importance this has for the working of the Canal.” It is expected 2o This was so because the beneficial impact on the incomes of poor families with members involved in the production of the affected products (which include chicken and chicken parts, beef and pork, and certain legumes, in addition to rice) would be offset by the impact on other poor families of the resulting increase in prices to the find consumer. *’ The components of demand are estimated annually, but there is no independent estimate of GDP; consumption is residually determined. There are no quarterly estimates of the components of demand however derived. 22 Erosion reduces the water entering the Canal system at its highest point, in Lake Gatt?.n, and therefore reduces the amount of water that may be used to raise and lower ships through the system of locks at either end. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- that the PCA’s net income will be adequate to allow it to defray whatever costs are entailed by the prevention of environmental damage. IV. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS 37. Staff projections for the period to 2004 assume a gradual increase between 1999 and 2004 in the rate of growth of output from 3% percent to 5 percent per annum, and the maintenance of the current low rate of inflation. The projected increase in output growth results from the substantial increase in the country’s capital stock brought about by the reversion, and by the recent increase in the level of private sector investment, but is also predicated on sound macroeconomic policy. Sound financial policies will also keep inflation low. Investment (both private and public sector) is assumed to decline relative to the high levels it reached in 1999, but gross fixed investment remains above the levels of the recent past. The external environment is assumed to be favorable, and in particular, it is assumed that activity in the ZLC recovers gradually from its current low level. This recovery, together with the decline in investment, should lead to a fairly substantial decline in the external current account deficit. The external current account deficit does remain high by the standards of the recent past but is covered by foreign direct investment (Table 7), and public external debt in relation to GDP declines noticeably (Table 8). 38. The fiscal program is predicated on the assumption that fiscal policy would eliminate the public sector deficit in 2000, and maintain a balanced position thereafter. Although the fiscal adjustment is front-loaded, it is not draconian, given the starting point and the projected rates of growth of output (see Section A). Moreover, front-loading the adjustment would increase its political feasibility, and would send a strong signal to markets of the government’s commitment to fiscal consolidation. In subsequent years, it should be possible to increase expenditure for well-targeted social programs without having to realize economies in other programs, given the scope for a modest increase in the tax ratio. The selective taxation of personal services and more efficient tax administration should allow an increase in tax revenues that does not introduce distortions and inequities. 39. The combination of no public sector borrowing requirement and reasonably rapid economic growth leads to a marked decline in the ratio of gross public sector debt to GDP- from 73.3 percent at end-1999 to 55.1 percent at end-2004. Net public debt (not taking account of the Trust Fund’s assets) would decline from 53.0 percent of GDP to 39.3 percent of GDP over the same period (see table below). This declining debt burden could be expected to enhance Panama’s credit rating and reduce its sovereign costs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Public Debt Projections-Normative Scenario (In percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Gross public debt 72.0 69.5 73.3 70.2 65.8 62.2 58.5 55.1 External 57.8 58.1 58.4 57.4 53.6 50.3 47.0 43.8 Domestic 14.1 11.4 14.8 12.8 12.2 11.8 11.5 11.3 Net public debt (excluding Trust Fund) 47.3 47.8 53.0 50.2 47.3 44.6 41.8 39.3 Memorandum item: Trust Fund Assets/GDP 8.7 11.4 13.6 12.9 12.1 11.4 10.7 10.1 V. STAFF APPRAISAL 40. The past year has been one of political transition, during which the electoral calendar slowed the pace of economic reform and loosened the stance of fiscal policy. Although the revised fiscal target for 1999 was not met, the public sector deficit was at least reduced from the level it reached in 1998. The modified budget proposal for 2000, if enacted, would entail a marked loosening of the fiscal stance. The adoption of an expansionary fiscal stance at this juncture would reverse some of the progress achieved with fiscal consolidation, and is not opportune. On the contrary, new administration should redouble its efforts to bring the public sector accounts into balance. Achieving and maintaining a balanced budget will benefit the Panamanian economy in a number of ways. Most importantly, by lowering interest rate spreads it would reduce the cost of servicing the public debt. Fiscal prudence will also sustain Panama’s attractiveness to investors, including investors in projects in the reverted areas. By reducing demand pressures, fiscal consolidation will help in maintaining competitiveness, and in achieving a sustainable current account. 41. The recommended reduction in the deficit in 2000 can be achieved by strict control of expenditure (including possibly postponing some of the recently announced projects), and by paring back the investment budget of the central government, which was inflated in 1998 and 1999 by election-related spending. If new social programs are adopted, they should be presented in a revised budget. Maintaining a balanced budget, once achieved, will require further progress in structural reform, along the following lines: extensions of the coverage of the SIAFPA system; measures, such as increases in the retirement age or reductions in the replacement ratio, to address the incipient pressures on the pension system; better control of health care expenditure; and more efficient administration of a simplified and more broadly- based tax system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - 42. Panama has already realized considerable progress in reducing the size of the public sector. IDAAN, the Water Company, is not operating efficiently, however. If its operations cannot be rationalized within the public sector, it would be best to privatize it, provided an adequate regulatory framework can be created. A similar policy rule should be adopted for Tocumen Airport, the other remaining sizeable nonfinancial public sector enterprise. 43. The increase in the external current account deficit that has occurred since 1997 owes much to the increase in private sector investment in Panama, which in turn is related to the new opportunities created by the reversion of the Canal Zone and its assets to P-a. Much of the increased current account deficit represents capital equipment imports financed by foreign equity. Another part reflects what is probably a temporary decline in the net exports of the ZLC. Given Panama’s currency arrangements, the large current account deficit cannot precipitate a balance of payments crisis, but it does leave the economy, particularly the banking system, vulnerable to swings in aggregate demand. The authorities should seek to ensure that capital inflows are directed to productive investment rather than being a source of financing for an excessive expansion in consumption. 44. The persistence of the external current account deficit also underscores the importance of an effective supervision of the banking system. Lending by the general license banks should be financing sound projects or consumer loans with an acceptable degree of risk. In this regard, the staff would put special emphasis on the need for up-to-date and reliable indicators of bank soundness. Moreover, although the nonperforming loans ratio remains fairly low, the recent increase may be pointing to balance sheet problems for some banks. 45. The substantial accumulation of proceeds from the privatizations of the past three years in the Trust Fund has prompted a debate on how these proceeds could best be used. The authorities have shown prudence in deciding to use these resources to repay public external debt. This course of action could increase substantially, and in a lasting way, the resources for recurrent social expenditure. It would also reduce borrowing costs for the whole economy. It would be important to ensure, however, that a modification of the Fund’s statutes to permit the use of its capital to repay debt would not open the door to less desirable uses. Similarly, the proceeds from future privatizations should be viewed as financing, not revenue, and should not result in additional expenditure. 46. The recent increases in tariffs on a group of food products reverse the prevailing trend to external liberalization. A concern for the impact of rapid liberalization on import- competing producers is understandable, but the recent increases will result in extremely high effective rates of protection for certain foodstuffs, notably rice. The increases should be phased out as quickly as possible, and a more transparent and better targeted means of assisting workers and producers of the products concerned found, should such assistance prove necessary. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 47. Panama’s statistical apparatus is generally satisfactory, but is not yet fully commensurate with the country’s status as an emerging market economy. Additional work in the areas the report has identified would undoubtedly facilitate the conduct of economic policy, and provide a more comprehensive and accurate picture of economic and financial developments for foreign and domestic investors. 48. As regards Fund support, the elaboration of a concrete agenda for reform is a necessary first step for further negotiations in order to assert Panama’s ownership of its reforms. It will also be important for the authorities to renew their commitment to external liberalization by adopting a schedule for the phased reversal of the recent increases in tariffs on foodstuffs. Finally, a revised budget should be adopted that demonstrates a commitment to fiscal consolidation. 49. It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Panama be held on the 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Panama: Quarterly Performance Criteria Under the Extended Arrangement (In millions of balboas) December 31,1997 March 31,1998 June 30,1998 Adj. Adj Adj. Pmg. Prog. Actual Margin Prog. Prog. Actual Margin Prog. prog. Actual Margin Ceilings on: Net borrowing requirements of the Nonfinancial public sector 11 central government 21 58 65 14 51 154 179 109 70 153 189 121 68 189 201 4 205 307 332 263 69 332 371 314 57 Net domestic borrowing requirement of the Nonfinancial public sector 31 central government 41 -185 -185 -172 -13 -87 -87 -92 5 -83 -83 -335 252 -88 -88 -244 156 21 21 2 19 48 48 -211 259 Contracting of nonconcessional public and publicly guaranteed external debt 51 With maturities of tivc or less years With maturities of more than five years I 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 bi 581 581 329 252 731 731 545 186 831 831 816 15 ’ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Panama: Quarterly Performance Criteria Under the Extended Arrangement (Concluded) (ln miUion3 of b&x3) scpt 30, 1998 Dec. 31,1998 Mar. 31, 1999 Jun. 30, 1999 scpt 391999 Adj. Adj. Mj. Adj. Adj. prop. Pq. ActdMnrgin Pq. Prog ActualMargin m Rag Actual Margin prop. Pro&Actual Margin prok prog. AcmMprgin ceuirngs on: Net borrowing requirement olthe Nonfinancialpnblicwdor II Ctntralgovcrmncnt2/ Net domes& borrowing requlrenmt of tbe Nontkm&lpublicsactor3/ cmtml gowuncnt 44 Contract@ of nonconcessional public and publicly gumnkcd extcmal debt 51 w~rllamakof~ycpsork.na Withmatmitiesofmorethmfiveyeara 170 238 327 -89 125 3% 452 519 -67 403 -186 -186 -159 -27 -279 -15 -15 -39 24 -61 0 0 0 0 0 1,008 1,008 849 I59 1,063 157 464 -279 -61 0 1,063 289 -132 186 208 378 -170 217 225 372 -147 287 295 351 -56 458 6 510 565 566 -1 598 645 610 35 677 724 652 72 -327 48 -202 -202 ’ -230 28 -217 -217 -536 319 -143 -143 -315 172 -254 193 28 28 -150 178 70 70 -420 490 137 137 -175 312 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,032 31 1,481 1,481 1,620 139 1,654 1,654 1,646 -9 1,689 1,689 1,648 0 1 -41 Sourws: Panammim mth&tiq and Fund statFatimata. l/Lk6ncdinpHagraph2ofthetcchnicalmemorandumof pnderstandinp. Ifprojmdatcd foreign loan dish urscmmb cxcccd lhc pmjcctcd level, this ceiling will be adjusted upward by the amount of exccw project &an&g WD&nedinpar;lgrtph3ofthetcchnkl mcmomndum of undastanding. Ifproject-rclatcd forsign 1o.m disbumementa exceed the projected ltvcl, this ceiling wiU be adjusted upward by the amount of the - project ~fjnm&tb 3/Ddincdinpamgmph2.bofthekhnicalmcmorandumof - “r&lbis~issubjccttomnpwPd~~~no!cxcadiagUSt20~for~~~the~~f~lougshowninTaMc4afthe tccbnkalmemomndmnof~ 4/ Dew in Pangrrph 3.b ofthe tcchaical memorandum of understanding This ceiling is subject to an upward adjustmcn~ not exctcding USS20 milkan, for Bhmtfsos from the ~jcct-relatcd foreign loam shown in Table 4 of the tcchniwlmmnomndum of wktmdmg 5/ Dcfincd in pangrapk 4 and 5 of the technk.al manorandnm of uadamtand& This wiling cxchules debt contracted on conctssiaul terms and debt contracted to carry out debt exchanSc. operation8 that reduce tbo net present valucofthoextemalpoblicdcbt. 6/Indicativctargcts. I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Panama: Selected Economic Indicators and Medium-Term Projections, 1995-2004 1998 1999 Projections 1995 1996 1997 Rev. Prog. Actual Rev. Prog. l! Rev. Proj. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Produetion and prices GDP at cutrent prices GDP at constant 1982 prices GDP deflator Consumer price index (end of year) Unemployment rate (urban areas, in percent) 2/ Domestic demand Public wmsumption at constant prices Private consumption at constant prices Public investment at constant prices Private investment at constant prices National accounts Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector Gross national saving Public sector Private sector Nonfinancial public sector Revenue and grants Expenditure current Capital Overall balance External current account balance 31 (including official transfers) Gross public debt 41 Public debt External Domestic Ofwhich: Short term (Annual percent changes) 2.2 3.1 1.8 2.8 0.5 0.3 0.8 2.3 14.0 14.3 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.6 1.5 14.9 16.9 2.2 6.2 5.0 5.6 5.0 5.0 5.6 6.1 6.1 6.6 6.6 4.5 4.0 4.1 4.1 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.5 5.0 5.0 1.7 1.0 1.4 0.8 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 -0.5 0.5 1.4 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 13.4 13.4 13.6 . . . 10.0 ’ . . . 7.2 . . . 17.5 . . . 4.8 . . . (Percent of GDP) 30.2 30.5 3.4 3.8 26.8 26.7 25.6 26.8 3.3 4.0 22.3 22.8 29.2 27.9 29.0 27.5 25.6 23.7 3.4 3.8 0.2 0.4 -4.7 -3.7 31.1 28.0 4.3 4.2 26.8 23.8 24.1 23.6 3.0 2.5 21.1 21.1 28.7 27.7 28.9 28.5 24.5 24.3 4.3 4.2 -0.2 -0.8 -6.9 -4.4 86.5 77.2 71.9 71.3 74.5 62.0 57.8 59.0 12.0 15.2 14.1 12.3 0.2 1.0 1.4 1.1 4.9 . . 8.7 . 53.5 ..: 8.4 . . . 34.3 27.3 6.4 3.0 27.9 24.3 21.0 23.5 2.4 1.7 18.5 21.8 28.3 26.5 31.3 27.5 24.9 24.5 6.4 3.0 -3.0 -1.0 -13.3 -3.8 69.5 58.1 11.4 0.4 67.4 56.8 10.6 1.0 11.6 . . . 1.6 -1.1 1.5 7.4 1.0 -12.8 9.0 -3.7 ! 35.6 32.4 6.2 5.2 29.4 27.2 21.8 21.2 4.2 4.9 17.6 16.3 30.2 30.2 31.9 30.2 25.7 25.0 6.2 * 5.2 -1.7 0.0 -13.8 -11.2 1 73.2 70.2 58.4 57.4 14.8 12.8 0.4 0.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.3 4.1 4.7 5.0 2.0 5.1 3.9 5.2 9.7 5.0 4.9 6.1 -1.6 1.9 1.0 4.8 31.1 30.5 29.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 25.6 25.0 24.0 22.3 21.9 22.8 5.2 5.2 5.2 17.1 16.6 17.6 I 29.5 5 5.5 I 24.0 22.8 5.3 17.5 30.7 30.7 30.7 30.7 30.7 30.7 30.7 30.7 25.2 25.1 25.1 25.1 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -8.8 -8.6 -6.7 -6.7 65.8 62.1 58.5 55.1 53.6 50.3 47.0 43.8 12.2 11.8 11.5 11.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Panama: Selected Economic Indicators and Medium-Term Projections, 1995-2004 (Concluded) 1998 1999 Projections 1995 1996 1997 Rev. Prog. Actual Rev. Prog. l! Rev. Proj. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Money and credit Net domestic assets of the banking system Public sector (net) Private sector Liabilities to the private sector interest rates (period average) Commercial lending rate (one-year) Deposit rate (six-month) Overall balance of payments Net foreign assets of the National Bank of Panama Debt service/exports of goods and nonfactor services St Debt service/nonfmancial public sector revenue 51 Real effective exchange rate (annual change, period average) Memorandum item: GDP at current prices (millions of balboas) -4.1 0.5 1.0 . . . 0.5 . . . 1.5 . . . . . . . . 7,906 8,151 8,658 9,217 Sources: Offme of the Comptroller General; Superintendency of Banks; and Fund staff estimates. (In percent of initial stock of liabilities to the private sector) 6.9 7.3 9.4 12.4 17.0 9.2 15.1 12.5 13.6 13.3 12.0 13.3 -3.9 2.5 -2.0 -3.6 -1.3 1.9 -0.2 -1.1 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.6 11.9 7.0 12.5 17.0 21.9 7.8 16.2 14.2 13.9 14.1 12.8 14.1 8.2 8.1 15.3 10.5 12.2 10.5 11.2 12.5 13.2 13.3 12.9 13.0 10.6 10.5 10.2 . . . 9.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.1 . . . 7.0 . . . . . . . . . (ln millions of U.S. dollars) -253.2 299.1 142.6 117.9 708.7 952.1 LO82.3 1,232.3 (In percent) -223.5 -30.6 -114.4 213.2 76.4 -8.5 906.3 L252.3 799.5 981.0 1,044.5 1,051.7 22.4 15.2 44.3 18.5 19.8 17.2 25.4 20.3 21.8 34.2 28.4 21.1 60.8 ..* 23.4 . . . 26.6 21.6 22.6 35.2 9,144 9,676 9,604 10,138 10,753 11,406 12,156 12,955 . . . . . . 95.8 -28.7 Ll38.3 18.4 18.5 . . . I/ Refers to program projections as presented in EBS/98/208 2/ Data generally refer to August observations. 3/ Includes current official transfers. 4/ Excludes public sector deposits abroad and with domestic banks, which at end-September 1999 amounted to 10.1 percent of GDP and 2.7 percent of GDP, respectively. S/ In 1997 and 1998, increases in debt service reflect commercial debt restructuring involving retirement of Brady bonds. In the year 2002, the Eurobond of US$SOO million, which was issued in February 1997 in connection with the retirement of Brady bonds, will be repaid witb the proceeds of a bond issue of equal magnitude in that year. 1,086.8 18.0 tL 00 17.8 I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 3. Panama: Summary Operations of the Nodimmcial Public Sector I/ 1995 19% 2000 1998 1999 Apprawd Namatiw 1997 RN.Prog.2/ Actual Rcv.Pn@ Jiatim&d Bndget3/ Pmj. Revenue and grants kveme clmmt ccnkalgovumnent SOti BCCurity rgcncY Publicantupriece opaatingb- oilux4l Cppitrl GrMtB 2,308.8 2,215.l 2,484.3 2,556.S 2,591.4 2,56X7 2,901.4 3,156.j 3,062.o 2,301.o 5271.2 2,413.7 2,506.5 5534.1 5562.7 5901.4 3J31.9 3,062.O 2,285.Z 2252.6 5383.6 z474.5 2,507.l 2,532.7 2,869.1 3,093.5 3Jt28.0 1,287.z 1,325.9 1,447.4 1,545.7 1,582.5 1,729.S p38.6 1,875.2 5045.7 586.5 613.5 613.0 655.1 666.8 681.0 707.9 902.3 747.3 370.6 293.5 240.4 170.8 134.3 15.2 108.0 96.0 114.0 40.9 19.7 82.8 102.9 123.4 107.0 114.6 220.1 121.0 15.8 18.6 30.1 32.0 27.0 30.0 32.3 38.4 34.1 7.8 4.6 70.6 50.0 57.3 0.0 0.0 24.4 0.0 Expenditure cklIrmts/ caltrdgovemmcnt SociBl scauity Bgemy other crpitrl Savings 61 2,294.4 tJ42.1 2,498.2 2,623.S 2JM6.4 2,655.l 3,067.7 3,579.6 3,062.o 5022.4 1,928.7 2J23.7 5240.1 z283.1 2,367.l 2,469.3 4823.7 2,532.2 1,185.6 1,079.6 1,207.3 1,303.l 1,324.l 1,401.o 1,477.5 1,711.4 1,482.7 720.2 725.5 780.7 804.8 815.2 825.0 850.3 922.7 897.6 116.7 123.5 135.7 132.1 143.7 141.1 141.5 189.6 151.9 272.0 313.4 374.6 383.4 583.3 288.0 S98.4 755.8 529.8 262.8 323.9 260.0 234.4 Overall balance 14.4 33.6 -w.9 -67.0 Financing (net) -14.4 -33.6 13.9 67.0 J3xtemBl 206.4 -145.9 190.3 430.1 Domestic -220.8 117.7 -172.2 -328.1 Plirdw71 0.0 72.6 671.7 554.5 TNltibIld 0.0 -78.0 -675.9 -589.5 Revenue and grants Rewmx c!ultralgo- socialsccmityegency Public ellte@ecB cqeming balance OtlWI4/ capital Grant8 29.2 28.0 28.7 21.7 28.3 26.5 30.2 3Ll 30.2 29.1 27.9 27.9 27.2 27.7 26.5 30.2 30.9 30.2 28.9 27.6 27.5 26.8 27.3 26.2 29.9 30.5 29.9 16.3 16.3 16.7 16.8 17.3 17.9 20.2 18.5 20.2 7.4 7.5 7.1 7.1 7.3 7.0 7.4 8.9 7.4 4.7 3.6 2.8 1.9 1.4 0.2 1.1 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.2 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.1 1.2 2.2 1.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 (In millioru ofbalboae) (Tn pemnt of GDP) 224.0 165.6 399.8 269.7 495.8 -275.0 -92.4 -166.3 -423.3 0.0 275.0 92.4 166.3 423.3 0.0 454.4 51.7 240.6 275.5 204.9 -155.1 75.7 -42.9 147.8 -125.0 260.5 0.0 241.4 69.4 0.0 -284.8 -35.0 -212.8 -69.4 -79.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Panama: Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector 11 (Concluded) 1995 19% 2000 1998 1999 Appmvcd Nonnati~ 1997 Rcv*v Actual RmPro&2l Erthnstsd Bud@31 Proj. ExpendRum cuucalt 51 cauralgo-t socid Beauity Bgmcy olhex a* fhVh,JB 6, ovens balance Memornndum Items: Projected overall balance of the PanamaCanalAntmolity IUtClWtObfieatiolls BalanceinTnmtFundfor D- (milliom of balbaaa) 29.0 27.5 25.6 23.7 15.0 13.2 9.1 8.9 1.5 1.5 3.4 3.8 3.3 4.0 0.2 0.4 -0.2 -0.4 2.6 -1.8 -2.8 1.4 0.0 0.9 0.0 -1.0 5.4 3.4 3.8 4.1 3.8 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.3 5.0 3.7 4.8 0.0 78.0 754.1 1,324.6 1,038.9 1,359.6 1,303.o . . . . . (InP-ofc+DP) 28.9 28.5 24.5 24.3 13.9 14.1 9.0 8.7 1.6 1.4 4.3 4.2 3.0 2.5 -0.2 -0.7 0.2 0.7 2.2 4.7 -2.0 -3.6 7.8 6.0 -7.8 -6.5 31.3 27.4 31.9 35.3 30.2 24.9 24.5 25.7 27.9 25.0 14.4 14.5 15.4 16.9 14.6 8.9 8.5 8.9 9.1 8.9 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.9 1.5 6.4 3.0 6.2 7.5 5.2 2.4 1.7 4.2 -3.0 -LO -1.7 4.9 0.0 3.0 1.0 I.7 5.0 0.5 25 -1.7 0.8 -0.4 2.8 0.0 25 -3.1 -0.4 -28 2.7 -4.2 4.2 2.7 1.5 0.7 -0.7 0.0 2.0 -1.2 0.0 -0.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 4. Panama: Summary Operations of the Central Government 1995 1996 2000 1998 1999 Approved Normative 1997 Rev.Pr0g.U Actual Rev.Prog.lI Est. Budget 2/ Proj. (In millions of balboas) Revenue and grants Current revenue Tax Nontax Capital revenue Grants Expenditure Current Wages and salaries Goods and services Pensions and transfers Interest Domestic External Capital and on lending Savings 31 Overall balance Financing (net) External Domestic Privatization Trust fond Revenue and grants Current revenue TaX Nontax Capital revenue GrMts Total expenditure Current Capital and on lending Savings 31 Overall balance Financing (net) Extemal Domestic Privatization Trust fund Memorandum item: (in millions of balboas) Nominal GDP (market prices) Balance in Trust Fund for Development 1,481s 1,549.2 1,671.0 1,671.7 1,767.7 1,742.S 1,954.l 2,0X2 2.062.0 1,471.8 1,543.l 1,597.g 1,619.7 1,708.4 1,740s 1,949.6 1,990.4 2,057.3 990.2 984.9 1,043.5 lJ90.3 1,103.g 1,185.g 1,183.8 1,235.3 1.248.9 481.6 558.2 554.4 529.4 603.9 554.6 765.8 755.1 808.4 1.9 1.5 2.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 4.5 22.2 4.8 7.8 4.6 70.6 50.0 57.3 0.0 0.0 15.6 0.0 1,627.4 1$X.1 1,667.S 2,040.6 2228.6 1,972.S 2556.6 2334.2 2,198.7 1,474.o 1,327.l 1,480.5 1,788.6 1,798.0 1,747.8 1,780.7 1,920.2 1,786.l 542.9 568.5 592.4 643.6 636.8 661.0 676.7 677.0 656.3 119.5 121.4 194.4 184.4 191.2 190.0 162.1 211.4 163.7 417.2 385.7 394.1 618.4 648.1 485.8 492.2 453.4 519.6 394.4 251.4 299.7 342.1 321.9 411.0 449.7 578.4 446.5 25.3 28.6 32.9 41.6 42.3 76.8 86.6 206.1 76.5 369.1 222.8 264.8 300.5 279.5 334.2 363.1 372.3 370.0 153.4 208.1 187.0 252.0 430.6 225.0 475.9 614.0 412.6 -2.2 216.0 117.4 -168.9 -90.1 -73 168.9 70.2 271.2 -145.9 14.0 3.5 -368.9 -460.9 -230.3 -302.5 -506.0 -134.7 145.9 -14.0 -3.5 368.9 460.9 2303 302.5 506.0 136.7 269.8 -96.9 240.0 323.3 471.8 86.5 256.0 269.9 215.5 -123.9 88.3 -243.5 45.6 -10.5 143.8 46.5 236.2 -78.9 0.0 72.6 671.6 554.5 260.5 0.0 241.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 -78.0 -671.6 -554.5 -260.5 0.0 -241.4 0.0 0.0 18.7 18.6 12.5 6.1 0.0 0.1 20.6 18.6 1.9 0.0 -1.8 1.8 3.4 -1.6 0.0 0.0 (In percent of GDP) 19.0 19.3 18.1 193 18.9 18.5 17.6 18.7 12.1 12.1 11.8 12.1 6.8 6.4 5:7 6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 0.5 0.6 18.8 19.3 22.1 24.4 16.3 17.1 19.4 19.7 2.6 2.2 2.7 4.7 2.7 1.4 -18 -1.0 0.2 0.0 -4.0 -5.0 -0.2 0.0 4.0 5.0 -1.2 2.8 3.5 5.2 1.1 -2.8 0.5 -0.1 0.9 7.8 6.0 2.8 -1.0 -7.8 -6.0 -2.8 18.0 20.3 20.0 20.3 18.0 20.3 19.6 20.3 12.3 12.3 12.2 12.3 5.7 8.0 7.4 8.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 20.4 23.5 25.0 21.7 18.1 18.5 18.9 17.6 2.3 5.0 6.1 4.1 -0.1 1.8 0.7 2.7 -2.4 -3.1 -5.0 -13 2.4 3.1 5.0 1.3 0.9 2.7 2.7 2.1 1.5 0.5 2.3 -0.8 0.0 2.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 -2.5 0.0 0.0 7,906.l 8,151.l 8,657.5 9217.0 9,143.8 0.0 78.0 754.1 1,324.6 1,038.g 9,676.0 9,604.3 1,359.6 1,303.O lOJ38.3 10,138.3 . . . Sources: Otice of the Comptroller General; Ministry of Economy and Finance; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Refers to program projections as presented in EBS/98/208. 2/includes $200 million in social investment expenditures, which the govemment has announced will be incorporated in a new “modified budget law. 31 Current revenue less current expenditure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 5. Panama: Monetary Accounts Decemba Prog. Dec. Dec. Sept. Prog.Dec. Est. Dec. Proj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1998 1999 1999 1999 2000 Net foreign assets Netinkmatidreserves National Bank of Panama Rest of banking syshm Long&m fore+ liabilities National Bank ofPanama Rest of banking syxtem 2J90.3 2,45 1.9 708.7 1,743.1 261.6 251.5 10.1 1,697.S 1,759.o 874.0 885.0 61.5 55.2 6.3 2,693.6 2.747.9 1,252.3 1,495.6 54.3 48.3 6.0 Net domestic asseta hblic sector (net) cepltral government (net) Rat ofthe publicsector Private 5ector other asset5 (net) 4,715.0 -1,030.6 497.7 -1,528.4 6,520.P -775.2 8,674.4 -1,119.9 538.8 -1,658.7 11,118.1 -1,323.7 7q6aa.9 -1.143.3 809.2 -1,952.5 10,168.8 -1,138.6 Net domestlc reserves 42.8 2,405s 2,784.S 2,573.6 2.X3.6 2.488.6 2,859.0 2.627.; 2.378.7 952.1 1,082.3 1,232.3 906.3 1,536.5 1,776.7 1.395.6 1,472.4 82.9 74.2 54.3 65.0 73.8 66.1 46.2 58.0 9.1 8.1 8.1 7.0 5523.5 5,925-S 7,002.O 7397.3 -857.7 -1,010.8 -1,324.9 -1.127.2 688.1 555.8 461.8 515.2 -1,545.7 -1,566.5 -1,786.7 -1,642.4 7,008.g 7.948.1 9,418.g 9.843.6 -927.6 -1.011.6 -1,OPl.P -1,319.l -119.2 -48.9 0.0 10.8 -385 LbbiWea to domestic private sector Total deposits Dud deposits Time deposits Savings deposits Fvivate capital Md surplus 6,948.l $516.2 816.1 3.709.7 990.5 1,431.g 7,510.2 S&61.7 9,575.2 9,721.S 5,849.4 6,716.6 7,&X6 7.550.2 833.2 991.9 1,081.l 1,116.5 3.903.6 4,454.l 4.944.0 4,953.2 1,112.6 1,270.7 1,410.5 1,480.5 1,660.8 1,945.l 2J39.6 2J71.5 lOJ33.S 8,068.7 1,032.4 5.401.9 1.634.4 2.264.8 10$30.5 8J16.3 1,194.6 5,463.1 1,558.6 2,364.2 Memormuhunitems: Total deposits (in perti of GDP) Percenhge change in total deposits over previous 12 month-period 69.8 71.8 77.6 81.3 82.6 84.0 85.5 8.2 6.0 14.8 10.7 12.4 12.1 10.5 cTedittoprivat.ek4ector (m percent of GDP) Perwntage chnge inprivate s&or credit over previolls 12 month-p&d 82.5 86.0 91.8 103.0 107.7 115.8 105.9 13.3 7.5 13.4 18.5 23.8 16.4 8.0 Danand deposhhtal deposits @Pe=N 14.8 14.2 14.8 14.5 14.8 12.8 14.5 (12-m& change in relation ta liabilities to the private sector at the beginaing of the period) Net foreign ass& 0.2 3.1 5.0 -2.4 -5.4 -3.3 1.3 Net domestic ssseta 6.9 7.3 9.4 12.4 17.0 14.6 9.2 l’ublicsector(net) -3.9 2.5 -2.0 -3.6 -1.3 -1.4 1.9 Private sector 11.9 7.0 12.5 17.0 21.9 17.0 7.8 --(net) -1.1 -2.2 -1.1 -0.9 -3.6 -1.0 -0.5 N&dommticmaves 1.2 -2.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.0 L.iabiMies to the private sector 8.2 8.1 15.3 10.5 12.2 12.1 10.5 (In millions of balboaa; end of period) , 1,984.0 2,048.O 799.5 1,248.6 64.0 58.0 6.0 8,866.3 -1.142.1 517.0 -1,659.l 11,421.g -1,413.4 -38.4 1og11.9 S,531.8 1,261.7 5,597.l 1,673.0 2,280.l 88.8 13.0 118.9 16.0 14.8 -3.4 15.1 -0.2 16.2 -1.0 -0.5 11.2 1,981.3 2,039.3 980.8 1,058.6 58.0 58.0 0.0 10,218.5 -1,262.l 543.0 -1,805.l 12.959.3 -1,478.g -40.6 l2J59.2 9,765-l 1,444.o 6,406.2 1,914.9 2,394.l 96.3 14.5 127.8 13.5 14.8 0.0 12.5 -1.1 14.2 -0.6 0.0 12.5 Sources: National Bank of Panama; Savings Baok; snd the Sopehhdency of Bsnks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 6. Panama: Balance of Payments Projections, 1995-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise specikd) 1995 1996 1998 1999 Proj . 1997 Prog. l/ Prel. Prog. l/ Proj. 2000 Current account Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Colon Free Zone, net Services, net Travel Trausportation PanamaCanal Commission/Authority Colon Free Zone (sea freight) Other Other services, net Of which: U. S. Defense Department Income, net Of which: Nonfinancial public sector interest payments Current transfers, net Of which: Oftkial, net Capital and fmancial accounf Capital account Of which: Public sector grauts Financial account Public sector Nonfinancial public sector Drawings Amortization 2/ other 31 National Bank of Panama Panama Canal Authority -369.1 -301.9 -603.5 -403.1 -1411.7 -588.9 -644.1 -700.3 -758.7 -1,371.l 744.4 740.6 844.3 847.8 864.2 -1,997.4 -2,248.9 -2,462.2 -2,367.5 -2,736.9 664.1 864.2 917.6 761.1 501.6 431.6 524.6 357.8 533.9 524.9 188.7 219.6 210.4 268.0 202.6 38.9 100.4 47.8 -28.1 226.1 585.5 598.2 633.0 . . . 689.6 -451.6 -371.2 -443.8 . . . -277.9 -95.0 -126.6 -141.4 . . . -185.6 204.0 204.6 99.6 294.0 96.2 197.3 177.7 -364.4 -317.1 180.9 . . . -411.6 -352.4 109.1 -524.5 -393.2 -243.3 -282.3 -317.5 -303.2 152.6 134.7 150.6 174.1 159.0 67.6 48.8 140.9 755.3 . . . . . . 61.5 1,124.7 70.6 176.6 68.9 521.0 1,183.l 50.0 56.7 . . . 140.9 -68.7 -124.0 99.7 -223.7 . . . 55.3 -16.6 . . . 70.6 755.3 1,054.l -108.4 -504.4 -108.4 -504.4 186.4 1,440.6 -276.8 -1,222.9 -18.0 -722.1 ,.. . . . 50.0 56.7 . . . 1.0 471.0 1,126.4 336.1 1,213.9 -234.8 -146.2 -30.4 38.2 -232.4 -141.8 -34.0 36.6 634.6 645.7 225.5 580.7 -277.5 -267.4 -224.5 -350.7 -589.5 -520.1 -35.0 -193.4 -2.4 -4.4 3.6 1.6 -16.6 50.0 . . . 41.3 -366.7 -1,329.4 -668.6 -1,464.l 947.9 825.8 -2,507-O -2,840.O 890.5 550.1 528.3 615.7 291.0 210.3 -42.3 304.3 . . . 702.0 . . . -202.9 . . . -194.9 279.6 101.2 . . . 114.6 -412.8 -648.0 -282.3 -396.9 186.4 167.0 61.5 72.4 336.1 1,214.g . . . .a. -1,134.2 -1,341.l 951.0 -2,864.1 572.0 594.1 222.0 385.6 807.3 -217.1 -204.6 -13.5 ..a -543.8 -400.5 156.5 76.4 1447.4 . . . . . . 1,347.5 234.1 236.5 715.4 -478.9 . . . -2.4 . . . 88.2 . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. Panama: Balance of Payments Projections, 1995-2000 (Conchded) (In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwk specified) 1995 1996 1998 1999 Proj. 1997 Prog. l/ Prel. Prog. 11 Proj. 2000 Private sector Direct investment Portfolio investment Of which: Banks Domestic (excluding BNP) Offshore Errors and omissions Overall balance Fkancing Net foreign assets of the National Bank of Panama Net use of Fund credit PurChase Repurchase Rescheduling Change in arrears Memorandum item: Current account/GDP 226.2 880.3 217.6 288.4 318.3 545.1 -309.7 46.8 -299.1 -283.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . -25.0 -154.3 -253.2 299.1 253.2 -299.1 -77.2 -243.4 -26.0 24.0 12.9 75.9 -38.9 -51.9 77.7 3,342.S 278.6 -3,422.5 -4.7 -3.7 1,506.6 705.8 1,163.l 816.9 -1,045.4 . . . 1,388.9 -111.1 772.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -378.7 . . . 142.6 117.9 -142.6 -117.9 -130.2 -150.0 19.7 40.0 45.8 53.1 -26.1 -13.1 35.7 19.1 -67.8 -27.0 4.9 -4.4 1,231.3 1,117.2 434.1 -320.0 -160.5 -229.0 68.5 -195.0 -223.5 223.5 176.1 28.2 41.5 -13.3 19.1 0.1 -13.3 366.5 1,087.5 202.4 . 1,206.9 . . . 61.6 164.1 -181.0 . . . -101.0 . . . 223.6 . . . -324.6 . . . . . . -30.6 -114.4 30.6 114.4 -20.0 106.8 30.2 -23.4 53.0 .*. -22.8 -23.4 20.3 31.0 . . . . . . -3.8 -13.8 1,113.2 1,087.5 -0.4 26.2 148.2 190.0 -41.8 . . . 213.1 -213.1 -181.4 -53.5 .*. -53.5 21.8 . . . -11.2 Sources: P anamanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Refers to program projections as presented in EBS/98/208. 21 In 1997 and 1998, increases reflect commercial debt restructuring involving retirement of Brady bonds. In the year 2002, the Eurobond of US$500 million, which was issued in February 1997 in connection with the retirement of Brady bonds, is assumed to be repaid with the proceeds of a bond issue of equal magnitude. 31 Includes mainly divestment proceeds imrested abroad for the government’s Trust Fund for Development. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Table 7. Panama: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Projections (In millions of U. S . dollars unless otherwise specified) 1999 Pmi prog. Proj. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Current account Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Importa, f.o.b. Colon Free Zone, net Services, net Travel Transportation Pauama Canal Commission/Authority Colon Free Zone (sea freight) other other services, net Of which: U. S. Defense Department Income, net Of which: Nonfiicial public sector interest payments Current trausfkrs, net Of which: Offk~ net Capital and financial account Capital account Of which: Public sector grants Financial account Public sector Nonfinancial public sector DlIWiIl@ AlUOl-tiZ+3tiOIl Other Natioual Bank of Pauama Pauama Canal Authority Private sector Direct iuvestment Portfolio investment Other Of which: Domestic (excluding BNP) Offshore Errors and omissions Overall balance Financing Net foreign assets of the National Bank of Pauama Net use of Fund credit Purchase RepKhW Rescheduling Change in arrears Memorandum item: Current account/GDP -366.7 -1329.4 -1134.2 -947.6 -982.9 -812.6 -871.2 -668.6 -1464.1 -1341.1 -1125.9 -1154.2 -1023.5 -1102.3 947.9 825.8 951.0 .1012.7 1085.9 1122.4 1176.0 -2507.0 -2840.0 -2864.1 -2746.4 -2887.4 -2838.5 -3021.5 890.5 550.1 572.0 607.9 647.2 692.6 743.3 528.3 615.7 594.1 626.5 661.4 697.9 735.2 291.0 210.3 222.0 235.5 251.1 267.6 285.3 42.3 304.3 385.6 405.4 426.1 447.9 469.8 702.0 807.3 852.5 900.3 950.7 1003.9 . . . -202.9 -217.1 -232.3 -248.5 -265.9 -285.4 . . -194.9 -204.6 -214.9 -225.6 -236.9 -248.7 279.6 101.2 -13.5 -14.4 -15.8 -17.6 -19.9 *.. 114.6 . . -412.8 -648.0 -543.8 . . . -606.3 . . . -650.7 . . . -650.5 . . . -671 .O -364.4 -396.9 -400.5 -454.1 488.9 -477.6 -485.6 186.4 167.0 156.5 158.2 160.6 163.5 166.8 . . . 72.4 76.4 81.1 336.1 1214.9 1347.4 1024.0 . . . . . . . . . 86.4 92.1 974.4 908.4 . . . . . 98.2 842.3 . . . . . . . 336.1 1213.9 -30.4 38.2 -34.0 36.6 225.5 580.7 -224.5 -350.7 -35.1 -193.4 3.6 1.6 . . . 88.2 366.5 1087.5 202.4 1206.9 0.0 61.6 164.1 -181.0 . . . . . 1347.5 1024.0 234.1 -52.7 236.5 46.8 715.4 207.5 -478.9 -254.3 . . . . . . -2.4 -5.9 . . . . . . 1113.2 1076.7 1087.5 1053.4 -0.4 -0.5 26.2 23.8 . . . .*. 974.4 908.4 -39.0 -21.6 -33.1 -15.8 688.0 201.1 -721.1 -216.9 . . . . . . -5.9 -5.9 . . . 1013.4 930.0 978.7 913.1 -0.6 -0.7 35.3 17.6 . . . 842.3 -26.0 -20.2 201.1 -221.3 . . . - -5.9 . . . 868.3 855.7 -0.8 13.5 . . . -101 .o 148.2 80.3 20.0 -33.0 -62.0 . . . 223.6 190.0 107.5 -5.0 45.0 -101.0 . . . -324.6 41.8 -27.2 25.0 12.0 39.0 . . . . . . -30.6 -114.4 30.6 114.4 -20.0 106.8 30.2 -23.4 53.0 . . . -22.8 -23.4 20.3 31.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 213.2 76.4 -213.2 -76.4 -181.5 -63.5 -53.5 -35.7 . . . . . -53.5 -35.7 21.9 22.8 *.. ..* . . . ..a -8.5 95.8 8.5 -95.8 -7.2 -86.6 -8.4 -9.1 . . . . . . -8.4 -9.1 24.1 . . . . . . . . . . -28.7 28.7 51.5 -22.7 . . . -22.7 . . . . -3.8 -13.8 -11.2 -8.8 -8.6 -6.7 -6.7 Sources: P anamanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt, 1995-2004 prog. ReI. prop. Proj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1998 1999 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 stock oftotal debt (ii millions of U.S. dollars) l/ Ofwhich: IMF Other multilateral in&&m3 5,890.g 5,052.o 5,007.4 130.9 142.2 675.1 791.2 62.0 57.8 159.7 146.8 479.4 1,509.7 58.5 33.6 111.8 105.8 15.2 44.3 1.8 1.0 3.5 3.1 21.1 60.8 2.6 1.4 24.9 71.1 12.2 2.2 5,438.3 5,312.3 5,493.5 5.613.5 5,818.5 5,758.7 5,741.2 5,716.3 5,673.4 183.6 181.6 213.8 964.8 946.4 1,079.7 148.4 999.0 58.4 98.1 62.4 1.133.5 1,295.g 59.0 58.1 56.8 57.4 53.6 54.0 1,397.3 50.3 44.9 22.1 1,497.7 1,590.l 47.0 43.8 152.0 173.4 610.6 605.8 153.1 184.6 616:l 771.4 178.8 168.3 159.2 661.8 746.9 1,233.g 151.9 143.8 691.2 709.1 22.1 21.4 33.4 28.4 56.2 44.3 16.1 16.5 112.1 95.6 156.1 153.4 153.9 ’ 203.4 236.7 289.9 18.5 19.8 17.2 25.4 20.3 21.8 34.2 18.4 0.7 3.5 0.7 3.1 0.9 4.4 0.9 5.0 26.6 1.7 4.7 1.3 5.9 0.5 6.6 . . . 23.4 . . . 21.6 22.6 35.2 0.4 0.8 7.7 7.3 18.5 17.8 . . . 0.8 . . . . . . 26.6 3.6 3.5 . . . 5.4 1.0 31.7 3.7 1.8 1.3 0.5 0.4 26.1 27.6 8.5 5.9 43.1 1.3 22.7 21.8 2.4 4.2 29.6 , 286.7 &t I 18.0 0.7 110.6 653.9 74.5 stock of total debt in percent of ODP stock oftotal debt in pemmt of exports of goods and savices 2l Debt service (in millions of U.S. dollars) 3/ Of which: IMP otbermultilateralinatiMioIls 201.2 655.8 47.7 123.9 Debt service in percent of exports of goods and services 2f Ofwhich: IMF 0th multilatmal htitutions Debt service in percent of NFPS revenue Of which: IMF 22.4 1.6 4.2 28.4 2.1 Debt service in percent of public sector current expenditure 32.4 IMF debt service in percmt oftotal debt service 21 7.3 Sources: Mi of Planning and Economic Policy, and hnd &tFeAmaies. l/AllstockfiSur~aremdofyeardata 2/ Includes net exports of the ZLC. 3/ In 1997, the increase reflects commercial debt restructuring involving retiremerd of Brady bonds. In the year 2002, the Eurobond of USSSOO million, which was issued in February 1997 in connedionwiththeretiramentofBradybondqisassumedtoberepaidwiththeproaeedsofabondissueofequal~&inthatyear. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Table 9. Panama: Indicators of the External Position and Financial Vulnerability (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Est. Proj. 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 Flnanckid tndlcaton Net public sector debt 12-month percent change in broad money l2-montb percent chaoge in private sector credit Deposit rate 6-month (in percent) Extemd indiaton 12aonth percent change in merchandise exports 12-month percent change in merchaudiae imports clurentaccotmtbalance Capital and haucial account balance Ofwhich: Private sector Portfolio investment Direct investment Public sector extemal debt l/ Total public extemal debt to exports in percent of exports of goods and sewices External interest payments to exports in percent of exports of goods and sewices 12-month REER percent appxkntion (-) Memorandumitems: Gross international reserves (ii USS) 21 780.5 1,016.S 1,147.2 954.3 836.8 1,018.l Reserves in months of imports 31 4.2 4.1 4.9 5.0 4.0 3.7 Broad money to net international rexrves 4/ 9.8 7.9 8.0 10.7 13.5 12.4 Nominal GDP (in millions of balboas) 7,906.O 8.151.0 8,657.S 9,143.g 9,604.O 10,138.3 Public extemaJ debt (in millions of US%) l/ $890.8 5,052.O 5,007.4 5,312.3 5,613.5 5,818.5 Exports of goods and services (millions of US%) S/ 2,928.0 3,163.0 3,410.o 3,300.o 3,041.o 3,255.O . . . 48.8 8.2 6.0 13.3 7.5 6.5 6.4 10.5 -0.5 13.9 2.4 -4.5 15.1 .6.9 12.6 9.6 10.4 3.8 0.9 -4.7 -3.7 -6.9 -13.3 -13.8 -11.2 1.8 9.3 12.9 12.9 12.7 13.0 4.0 6.7 -12.1 2.4 3.5 13.4 74.5 62.0 57.8 201.2 159.7 13.4 7.7 -1.8 0.4 0.8 47.3 47.8 53.0 50.2 14.8 12.4 13.0 14.5 13.4 23.8 16.0 13.5 6.2 6.1 7.0 . . . 0.0 10.7 57.4 146.8 8.3 4.8 0.6 12.2 12.6 58.1 58.4 153.1 184.6 9.2 10.0 -1.6 . . . 178.8 9.3 . . . Sources: Miitry of Economy and Finance, National Bank of Panama, and Fond staff estimates. l/ Noofuuncial public sector extemal debt. 2J Cotresponds to foreign assets of the National Baok of Panama (a publicly owned commercial bank). They are not roservos in tho conventional sense. J/Gross resaves are measored at the beginning ofthe period. 41 At end of period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38- . Table 10. Panama: Changes in Banking Legislation . 1998 Banking Law Provisions 1970 Banking Law Provisions 1. Creation of a Superintendency of Banks to replace the CBN 1. Establish the National Banking Commission (CBN) The general policy of the Superintendency is determined by Seven member Commission including: two ministers, the a five-member executive board and day-to-day operations Manager of the National Bank of Panama, three appointed are run by a Superintendent. Neither the board members nor members representing banks, and another appointee who the Superintendent can be bankers. could not be a banker. The Superintendency has autonomy over its budget and personnel, and can exercise significant power to inspect and regulate banks, including public banks. The CBN was assigned to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Policy and did not have autonomy over budget and personnel decisions. The Superintendent has powers to intervene in banks facing difficulties. Bank intervention by the Commission required a vote of approval by five of its members. 2. Capital adequacy requirements The minimum capital requirement for general license banks is US%10 million (the capital requirement is USS3 million for international license banks). Uniform capital adequacy requirements consistent with international practices recommended by the Base1 Committee. Banks must maintain capital funds of at least 8 percent of their risk-weighted assets and off-balance sheet operations. The risk weights will be set by the Superintendency to be consistent with international practices. Elimination of the requirement to maintain contingency credit with other banks. Elimination of the “legal reserve.” 3. Credit concentration limits Credit concentration limits are restricted as a percent of a bank’s capital funds (25 percent). No exemptions except for banks with mixed capital and headquarters in Panama and which are primarily lenders to other banks; in which case, the limit goes to 30 percent. 2. Capital adequacy requirements Complex set of capital adequacy requirements across categories of banks depending upon years of operations (beginning at US$250,000 and increasing by US$40,000 per year for the first five years and US$75,000 for the next five years). Banks with ten years of operations must have a minimum paid-in capital of US%1 million. Capital requirements were to be assessed on a risk-weighted basis, however, there was no uniform method of assessment for all banks. Imposed contingency credit requirements (that is, a U.S. dollar-denominated credit from a foreign bank or from the head offlice for branches of foreign banks) equivalent to 10 percent of productive assets. Imposed “legal reserve” (“encaje legal”) requirements in cash assets as a percent (set by the Commission between 5 percent and 25 percent) of total local deposits. 3. Credit concentration limits Credit concentration limits were restricted as a percent of a bank’s capital, reserves, and deposits (5 percent). Several exemptions from those limits (including credit to the state and credit secured by collateral worth 15 percent of the loan amount). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39- Table 10. Panama: Changes in Banking Legislation (Concluded) 1998 Banking Law Provisions 1970 &king Law Provisions 4. Credit to related parties 4. Credit to related parties Sets strict limits on guaranteed and nonguaranteed lending to related parties. Placed controls only on nonguaranteed credit to related parties. Establishes an overall ceiling of 75 percent of capital on lending to related parties that is not guaranteed by deposits. Did not set limits on guaranteed credit, overall limits, or state the conditions for such credit. Includes limits on lending to bank employees, and to firms related to bank directors, the bank, or an associated economic group. 5. Consolidated supervision Provides for consolidated supervision. The Superintendency has the power to supervise Panamanian bank branches and subsidiaries overseas and similarly, foreign banks in Panama are subject to consolidated supervision by their home authority. The consolidated supervision by foreign supervisors must guarantee confidentiality and visits must be restricted to bank supervision only (see below). Consolidated supervision by overseas authorities will be conducted on a reciprocal basis. 6. Bank secrecy Maintains bank secrecy. However, under its provisions, the Superintendency has powers to gather all information necessary to adequately supervise banks, including information on deposits (aggregates), assets, and capital, while maintaining the confidentiality of this information. Specified standards for individuals only and did not specify standards for economic groups. 5. Consolidated supervision Did not provide for consolidated supervision. 6. Bank secrecy Bank secrecy rules prevented the CBN from accessing - information on deposits (except by court order), adequately examining a bank’s assets and comparing information with other banking supervision sources. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- Table 11. Panama: Resolutions Issued by the Superintendency of Banks Since its Incorporation in June 1998 Year Decree No. Regulation 1998 1-98 2-98 3-98 4-98 5-98 6-98 1999 2000 l-99 2-199 3-99 4-99 5-99 6-99 Pending Establishment of the fees to be paid for the operation of the offrce of the superintendency. Establishment of iines for the l$e submission of reports to the superintendency. Adoption of international accounting rules (Base1 rules) in respect to reporting by local and international banks to the superintendency. Adoption of an agreed framework for carrying out the.audits of banks using external auditors. Standards with respect to capital adequacy and the minimum capital for the establishment of general license banks. Standards with respect to capital adequacy and the minimum capital for the establishment of international license banks. Definition and parameters on lending to specific economic groups (concentration of credit limits). Definition and parameters on lending to related parties. Definition and parameters with respect to lending between banks and related financial institutions. Expansion of the reporting systems allowing banks to adopt either standard international accounting methods or use accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Format for the certification of the capital adequacy of foreign banks with general license by their external auditors or supervising agency. According to Decree 5-98. Format for the certification of the capital adequacy of foreign banks with international license by their external auditors or supervising agency. According to Decree 6-98. Regulations on: - Standards for liquidity - Classification of assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX I I. II. III. Iv. V. VI. Panama-Fund Relations (As of December 3 1,1999) Membership Status: Joined 3/14/46; Article VIII. A. Financial Relations Genera1 Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Stand-by arrangements Extended arrangements Financial Arrangements: Type EFF Stand-by Stand-by Approval Date 12/10/97 1 l/29/95 02f24192 SDR Million 206.60 303.08 11.86 Percent of Quota 100.0 146.7 5.7 SDR Million 26.32 1.20 Percent Allocation 100.0 4.6 SDR Million 68.33 40.00 Percent of Quota 33.1 19.4 Expiration Date 12/09/00 0313 l/97 09/23/94 Amount Amount Approved Drawn (SDR million) (SDR million) 120.00 40.00 84.30 84.30 74.17 54.57 Projected Obligations to Fund: SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue 1213 l/99 2000 2001 Forthcoming 2002 2003 2004 Total 0.0 44.8 29.9 9.1 9.3 9.0 Principal 0.0 39.3 26.2 6.2 6.7 6.7 Charges/Interest 0.0 5.5 3.7 2.9 2.6 2.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I B. Nonfinancial Relations VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Panama uses the U.S. dollar as the primary means of payment in the local economy. Its national currency (Balboa) is issued in the form of coins only and serves as a unit of account. The exchange rate of the Balboa is fixed at B 1 per U.S. dollar. Panama has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, and maintains ai exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: The 1998 Article IV consultation was concluded and the second review under the extended arrangement was approved by the Executive Board on December 16,1998 (EBS/98/208). Panama is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Ix. Technical Assistance: a. FAD: A mission visited Panama in April and November 1992 to identify areas to improve financial reporting and public expenditure control. In December 1996 a mission visited Panama to advise the authorities on procedures to improve budget monitoring. b. MAE: A consultant visited Panama in April 1996 to advise the authorities on domestic public debt management. Follow-up assistance was provided in April 1997. c. STA: A mission visited Panama in May 1992 to improve balance of payments statistics. In April 1996 a staff member of STA temporarily joined the Article IVLJFR mission to resolve methodological issues in the compilation of Panama’s national accounts; follow-up technical assistance was provided in July 1997. A mission reviewed the methodology of the compilation of the balance of payments in September 1996. In July 1997 a long-term advisor, who began to work with the authorities on further improvements in balance of payments and debt statistics, completed this assignment in early 1999 and the authorities published revised balance of payments data for 1989-98 in March 1999. X. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX II Panama-Statistical Issues Although Panama provides the core statistics to the Fund, a general concern with Panama’s statistics is the lack timely reporting. Key information on the financing of the budget is transmitted to the Fund with a lag of six to eight weeks. The authorities began to publish an advance release calendar of their economic statistics in April 1998. In addition, they have begun to implement an improved revision policy that allows for periodic revisions of economic statistics based on improved source data and methods. Significant improvements have been made to the national accounts and the balance of payments, and programs have been initiated to improve government finance statistics through the implementation of a new integrated financial administration system (SIAFPA). The newly established Superintendency of Banks is reviewing data collection and processing of monetary statistics and has begun to disseminate data on its web page. Real sector a. Current status: The authorities have broadened the coverage of the national accounts statistics and improved the methodology of compilation. The accounts now include resident banks and enterprises operating in the Colon Free Zone (ZLC) and take into account exports of financial services. Constant price series were revised to reflect 1982 weights (the previous series used 1970) and the data were harmonized with the balance of payments. The revised data are available for the period 1980-98. b. Pending issues: The weights underlying the consumer price index (CPI) were derived from a household budget survey conducted in 1983/84. Consumer price data are available through November 1999. National accounts technical assistance missions in 1996 and 1997 noted problems in the methodology used to compile value-added for financial services and in the source data used to measure transactions involving enterprises in the ZLC. In addition, the development of a supply-use framework was recommended. The authorities are continuing work in these areas. Despite recent improvements, preliminary estimates of real GDP volume remain unreliable and untimely, in part because of delays in data collection and the lack of skilled national accountants in the statistical unit. C. Technical assistance: An STA mission visited Panama in June-July 1997 to work with the Office of the Comptroller General to further improve the measurement of value- added in the financial sector and the ZLC. Follow-up technical assistance may be required. The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean is supporting the development of a supply-use table. Government finances a. Current status: Data on central government finances are provided on a cash and an accrual basis. Data on the public enterprises and agencies are compiled only on a cash basis. Monthly and quarterly published data in the IFS cover the operations of the budgetary central Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX II government and are currently available through July 1999. Annual data on the operations of the consolidated central government are available in the STA database through 1997. b. Pending issues: Monitoring of public sector financial developments would be facilitated if data on public enterprises and agencies were provided on an accrual basis and were more timely, if the consistency of information on intrapublic sector transfers were improved, and if the coverage of the investment program were made complete. The authorities have recently begun to compile the finances of the public sector on a consolidated basis and to reconcile the public sector balance with its financing. The implementation of a more centralized and complete data collection system (SIAFPA) is currently ongoing and began, during the preparation of the 1999 Budget, with the coverage of central government expenditures. It is anticipated that coverage of the system will be expanded to include central government revenues and the public debt by June 2000, and then other public institutions sometime thereafter. A new Director of SIAFPA was appointed in the Ministry of Economy and Finance in December 1999. The recently established Treasurer’s function in the Ministry of Finance in conjunction with the electronic linkage of all public sector entities, when fully operational, is expected to improve the timeliness of public finance statistics. In addition to broadening SIAFPA’s scope of coverage, there is a need to address the issue of unrecorded expenditures, which have resulted in persistent and significant discrepancies in the measurement of fiscal performance from above and below the line. In this regard, the authorities have indicated that they could seek additional technical assistance with public expenditure management and in the operation of some Treasury functions from the Fund. Monetary accounts a. Current status: Provision of data by the monetary authorities has been regular and reasonably current. These data are available through December 1999. Data on the operations of the commercial banks are prepared by the Superintendent of Banks with a lag of one to two months, although they are reported for publication in IFS with somewhat longer lags. Problems concerning information on private banks’ holdings of government securities are being addressed. b. Pending issues: Corrections to classifications following privatizations occur with a lag in the accounts of the Banco National de Panama. There are no consistent data prepared on the financial positions of the National Mortgage Bank and the Agricultural Development Bank. C. Technical assistance: The new Superintendency of Banks may require technical assistance to improve data collection and compilation procedures in the medium term. Balance of payments a. Current status: An STA technical assistance mission in September 1996 identified problems in compilation procedures and systems, including misclassification of external debt transactions, untimely collection of data, and poor quality control procedures, and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX II recommended a long-term technical assistance program to address these issues. To implement this program, a series of technical assistance missions took place in July 1997, October-December 1997, and April-June 1998. This technical assistance has led to significant improvements in the quality and timeliness of external sector statistics, including through periodic reconciliation of external debt statistics discrepancies with multilateral lenders. International Investment Position data for 1996-98 are now compiled, and the balance of payments statistics are mostly prepared according to the guidelines of the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPMS) and are now available quarterly with a one month lag. b. Pending issues: Follow-up technical assistance has led to further statistical revisions for the 1989-98 balance of payments. But data are not yet available on nonfinancial private sector debt or on transactions involving financial derivatives. Furthermore, the January-March 1999 mission concluded that a major shortcoming stems from the serious delay in the collection and validation of foreign direct investment and other financial transactions of the recently privatized enterprises, and several associated services. C. Technical assistance: STA began a long-term technical assistance program in July 1997 to improve the balance of payments and external debt statistics. In preparation for this program the authorities provided additional budgetary and human resources to deal with administrative problems and the lack of adequate data processing equipment in the Balance of Payments Section of the Directorate of Statistics and Census. The advisor, who visited Panama twice in 1997 and once in 1998, completed his assignment in early 1999, and the authorities published revised balance of payments data for 1989-98 in March 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPanama: Core Statistical Indicators as of December 14,1999 Date of latest observation Date received Frequency ofdata Frequency of reporting Source of update Mode of reporting CtXlti Intema- Bank Reserve/ Exchange tional Balance Base Rates Reserves Sheet Money Broad Money 1 n.a. 1 Monthly 1 Monthly / n.a Fixed Fixed n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. na. n.a 12/99 12/99 12J99 12J99 n.a n.a l/o0 l/o0 l/O0 l/O0 n.a n.a Monthly Monthly n.a Monthly Monthly n.a Offkial Official n.a Agency Agency Fax Fax n.a / n.a. / Monthly 1 Monthly 1 n.a ) n.a ( Fax 1 Fax 1 n.a Confidentiality n.a Unrestricted Used by n.a staff only Frequency of publication n.a Annually Ammally n.a 9199 Quarterly Monthly Quarterly Offkial Official Agency Agency Jnrestricted Annually Rates lOl99 Fax Consumer Current Overall External Price Exports/ Account Government GDP/ Public Index imports Balance Balance GNP Debt 9539 IO/99 Monthly Official AgeIv E-Mail Use by staff only Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX III Panama-Financial Relations with the World Bank Group (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total IBRD Lending Operations by Sector as of November 30,1999 Disbursed Undisbursed 813.7 175.5 Electric power and other energy 186.6 Agriculture 24.3 Transportation 157.1 Social sector 5.6 Urban development and housing 27.0 Water supply and sanitation 23.0 Environment 3.7 Health, population, and nutrition 9.3 Finance 21.0 Education 24.5 Public sector management 10.6 Multisector 321.0 * 0.0 0.0 96.6 22.4 0.0 0.0 18.8 20.0 0.0 10.5 7.2 0.0 Principal payments 11 524.8 Debt outstanding 2/ 287.1 Commitment during CY99 0.0 Disbursements during CY99 30.3 IFC commitments 3/ 37.0 Recent activities: The last two loans approved were the Second Roads Rehabilitation Loan (on September 15,1999) and the Public Policy Reform SAL (on November 19, 1999) for a total commitment of US$146 million. Preparation of the Land Administration and the Second Basic Education project is underway, while the Public Policy Reform TAL is under identification. Source: The World Bank. l/ Including amounts sold to third parties (USS9.2 million). 2/ Including valuation changes (-1.6 million). 3/ Includes only loans and equity instruments currently held. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIXIV Panama-Financial Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank (In thousands of U.S. dollars) IDB Lending Operations as of November 30,1999 Disbursed Undisbursed ongoing operations (amount less cancellation) Agriculture 16,122 Electricity 790 Transportation 168,896 Health 21,060 Education 36,259 Urban development 23,390 Social development 30,493 Water supply and sewerage 9,329 Technical assistance 30,843 PRIBA 95,910 Environment 2,092 Financial sector 32,960 Total 468,144 20,940 78,210 167,104 20,940 54,009 29,760 67,257 35,671 25,547 24,090 84,538 97,170 705,236 IDB loans approved since 1961 (in thousands of U. S . dollars) Total operations 1,962,612 Cancellations 204,013 Principal payments 602,200 Debt outstanding as of September 30,1999 692,507 New commitments CY 1999 64,700 Disbursements CY 1999 49,500 Recent activities: In CY98, the IDB approved loans for US%34 1 million and disbursed USS 13 1.4 million covering Justice, Export Competitiveness, Power Transmission, rural roads and bridges, and sustainable development program for the Darien region. In CY99, loan approvals and disbursements dropped significantly to USS64.7 million and USS49.5 million, respectively. Two important policy loans (SECFIN and PRIBA) are still pending compliance with conditionalities. These two loans represent US$ 115 million in budget support resources that may be renegotiated. Performance of the IDB loan portfolio is expected to be modest in 2000 due to Government’s budgetary constraints. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public