DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR OFF-SITE ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 El AGENDA SM/O1/67 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February 26,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: BotswanaCtaff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Botswana, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, March 12,200l. A draft decision appears on page 25. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Botswana indicating that they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. John Green (ext. 34797) and Mr. Mfunwa (ext. 35973). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, March 6,200l; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND BOTSWANA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Jesus Seade February 23,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. II. III. IV. V. Vl. Introduction.. ................................................................................................................. .5 Recent Developments ................................................................................................... .6 Medium-Term Outlook.. ............................................................................................... .9 Report on Discussions ................................................................................................ .12 A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ................................................................. 12 B. Fiscal Policy .......................................................................................................... 15 C. Structural Issues ................................................................................................... .18 HIV/AIDS ................................................................................................................... .20 Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................. 22 Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. Poverty in Botswana ................................................................................................... .12 International Financial Services Center.. .................................................................... .19 The Macroeconomic Impact of AIDS in Botswana ..................................................... 21 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2003.. ........................................ ..2 6 Sectoral GDP and Savings-Investment Balances, 1996/97-2003/04.. ........................ .27 Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of Botswana, 1994-2000.. .................................... .28 Money Survey, 1994-2000 ......................................................................................... .29 Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 ............................................................................... .30 Central Government Operations, 1996/97-200 l/2002.. .............................................. .3 1 Figures 1. 2. 3. Main Economic Indicators, 1990-99 ............................................................................ .7 Selected Exchange Rate Indicators ................................................................................ 8 HIV Infection and Working-Age Population, 1998-2010 .......................................... .10 Appendices I. II. III. IV. V. Relations with the Fund .............................................................................................. .32 Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................ 34 Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 35 Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................. 38 Public Information Notice .......................................................................................... .39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -3- Executive Summary Botswana’s macroeconomic situation has improved since the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in October 1999. However, Botswana’s medium-term outlook is clouded by the likely macroeconomic implications of AIDS: l Economic growth increased to an estimated 7% percent in 1999/2000, the budget deficit was erased, and the current account surplus increased. These gains, however, largely reflected a turnaround in the global diamond market. l Consumer price inflation rose in 2000 to 8% percent, but remained broadly in line with core inflation in South Africa. This pattern reflects Botswana’s exchange rate peg to a basket of currencies (in which the rand has a large weight), and the fact that much of Botswana’s trade is with rand-area countries. Domestic inflationary pressures came fron rapid credit growth, despite increases in Bank of Botswana interest rates, and a construction sector stretched by government development projects. n l Looking forward, economic growth is expected to slow in the near term, mainly reflecting the plateau in diamond production that was reached last year. The monetary tightening in 1999-2000 and near-flat government development spending in 2000/01 are expected to dampen demand growth. Over the medium term, AIDS could slow annual economic growth to around 3 percent a year, with risks on the downside. l Nonmineral output growth averaged 6% percent in the past two years. Skill shortages were seen as an important impediment to faster growth, despite Botswana’s investment in education. Other impediments include a shortage of serviced land for development, and an inefficient government bureaucracy that delays the issuance of business and work permits. The exchange rate was not seen as a problem by the central bank. The mission pointed out that competitiveness could best be improved by lowering costs through sound macroeconomic policies. Discussions centered on monetary and fiscal policies and the macroeconomic consequences of AIDS: l Officials and the mission team agreed that Botswana’s pegged exchange rate - arrangement was the appropriate nominal anchor because of Botswana’s close trade links with neighboring countries. The mission endorsed the increases in interest rates by the Bank of Botswana over the past two years, noting that the pursuit of two monetary objectives was possible because of a lack of development in Botswana’s financial markets. The decision to change the monetary stance will be made difficult by a lack of timely data, especially for the national accounts and labor markets. The mission encouraged the authorities to devote more resources to data collection and presentation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- * Botswana is currently developing an offshore financial services center as a means of strengthening its domestic service sector and providing job experiences to the labor force. The mission urged the authorities to proceed slowly so that the center does not outstrip Botswana’s capability to monitor and supervise firms operating in the center. l The improvement in the government budget in 1999/2000 mainly reflected the rebound in diamond revenue, but a slowdown in spending growth was also a factor. Preliminary estimates of the 2000/01 budget indicate a surplus for the same reasons. The mission emphasized the importance of controlling spending, noting that, while Botswana can easily finance short-run deficits, revenue growth will slow substantially because of the plateau in diamond production. Fiscal pressure will also come from health and safety net costs associated with AIDS, and potentially a decline in direct tax collections also due to AIDS. l To better control spending, the mission recommended that Botswana adopt an annual medium-term budget framework covering all categories of spending. Experience in other countries suggests that such a framework could strengthen fiscal discipline, provide a rationale for current spending patterns, and help in making the difficult choices related to AIDS in the period ahead. l The main macroeconomic impact of AIDS will be a reduction in potential output growth of up to 3 percentage points a year in the longer term. However, the magnitude of the actual reduction in economic growth and its timing are uncertain, owing to difficulties in knowing the true infection rate, the progression of the disease, and how productivity and foreign investment will be affected. l The impact of AIDS on actual output will also depend on demand factors and on the degree to which employment growth can be maintained through the absorption of those now unemployed. About 16 percent of Botswana’s labor force is estimated to be unemployed, and absorption of these workers could allow employment and, therefore, the economy to grow apace for several years while labor force growth slows. However, skill shortages within this pool may reduce the buffering effect. Botswana: Selected Financial and Economic Indicators, 1995-2001 m. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 GDP at constant 1990 market prices Consumer price index (period average) Broad money Budget balance (including grants) External current account balance Gross reserves (months of imports) 25.2 34.7 28.8 35.7 35.7 38.6 36.4 (Annual percentage change) 6.6 7.1 8.0 4.5 10.0 7.8 3.7 10.5 10.1 8.8 6.5 7.4 8.6 6.0 22.8 26.9 18.4 25.6 27.1 . . . . . . (In percent of GDP) 2.0 4.5 -6.1 2.0 5.7 3.6 3.0 6.3 10.4 13.9 3.9 10.0 17.0 11.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. LNTR~DUCTI~N 1. A staff team conducted the 2000 Article IV consultation discussions during November 27-December 8,200O in Gaborone.’ The mission met with Minister of Finance and Development Planning Baledzi Gaolathe, Bank of Botswana Governor Linah Mohohlo, other officials of the Bank of Botswana and the government, commercial banks, representatives of the business community, and labor unions. 2. At the conclusion of the 1999 Article IV consultations, Executive Directors commended the authorities for their record of implementing sound macroeconomic policies. However, Directors expressed concern over the marked deterioration of the fiscal position in 1998/99 and the unsustainable growth of credit to the private sector, both of which could undermine macroeconomic stability. They urged the authorities to bring credit expansion firmly under control and to implement the spending limits outlined in the 1999/2000 budget. Directors noted that Botswana’s principal challenge over the medium term was to address high unemployment by diversifying the economy away from diamonds. Directors also underscored the importance of raising skill levels of the labor force and reducing skills mismatches in the labor market. 3. There are problems with some of Botswana’s economic statistics. ’ While monetary data reports are timely and the consumer price index (CPI) is published within weeks of each month’s survey, national account and labor market data are only available with lags (17 months and 15 months, respectively at the time of the consultation). Different accounting periods for national accounts, the government’s financial year, and the balance of payments complicate analysis and policy formation.’ 4. Botswana accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3 on November 17, 1995. It maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions except for the multiple currency practice discussed in paragraph 48. ’ The staff team comprised Messrs. Green (head), Kyei, Mfunwa, Ms. Sgherri (all AFR), and Mr. MacFarlan (RES). ’ Botswana provides adequate data on reserves, foreign currency liquidity, and external debt for surveillance purposes in view of its large net asset position and degree of capital market development. The frequency and level of detail (on debt data) falls below SDDS benchmarks. 3 National accounts data are published on a July-June reporting year; budget data are published for the April-March fiscal year; and balance of payments on the calendar year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 11. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 5. Economic growth is currently estimated at 7% percent in 1999/2000, up from 4 percent the year before, but this increase largely reflects special conditions (Table 1 and Figure 1). Strong demand in global diamond markets and additional diamond production capacity completed during calendar-year 2000 accounted for about one-half of the estimated growth, but this performance is unlikely to be repeated beyond this year (2000/O 1) because mines are near capacity and no significant new ones are being developed. Consumer demand has been fueled by the lagged effects of the 25 percent pay increase for government employees in mid-1998 and easier access to bank credit, while investment spending has been driven by development projects under the National Development Plan 8 (NDP 8) (Table 2). Economic growth has been dampened by flooding in early 2000, political uncertainty in Zimbabwe, and an increase in Bank of Botswana interest rates, but the extent of the slowdown is difficult to quantify because of data lags. Slower government spending growth may also be cooling the pace of expansion. 6. Price and wage developments have been mixed (see Figure 1). Consumer price inflation rose to 8.7 percent in December 2000 from 6% percent at the end of 1998, broadly in line with core inflation in South Africa. (Botswana’s exchange rate is pegged to a basket of currencies in which the rand has a large weight.) The rise reflects the jump in global oil prices and several developments specific to Botswana, including an increase in road user fees and a large hike in administered rents.4 In addition, buoyant demand created inflationary pressures, especially in the construction sector. Real wages declined by about 3 percent on average in the year ended September 1999 (the most recent data available). This decline is consistent with high unemployment (close to 16 percent in 200,0), but inconsistent with the almost universal reports from private sector employers of a tight labor market, especially for skilled and experienced workers and professionals. More up-to-date and reliable labor market indicators would help to explain this potential inconsistency. 7. The Bank of Botswana reacted to buoyant domestic demand and very strong credit growth with a series of increases in its bank rate (to 14.75 percent in October 2000) (Tables 3 and 4). As discussed below, Botswana is able to maintain a pegged exchange rate and also influence domestic interest rates because its capital markets are not well developed. Thus, by end-2000, the prime rate in Botswana was slightly above that in South Africa; a year ago, it was more than 10 percentage points below. The effective pula exchange rate was broadly unchanged during 2000 in both real and nominal effective terms (Figure 2). 4 The CPI component of rents for one class of Botswana Housing Corporation (BHC) properties rose by 40 percent in July 2000. The magnitude of the rise reflects a reporting error and subsequent correction in this index component. In addition, the rise in BHC rents may overstate the inflation in housing costs because this component’s weight in the CPI may be too high in view of the ongoing shift toward private sector housing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Figure 1. Botswana: Main Economic Indicators, 1990-99 GDP Growth l! (Annual percentage change) . I’ 1 Nonmining GDP at constant prices ’ I , , ’ a , . -2 ’ 24 21 18 15 12 9 , 6 12 60 Central Government Operations 21 (In percent of GDP) dget balance Bu L 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 Consumer Price Index :Average annual percentage change) 4 20 11 16 8 I2 IS 8 12 4 9 0 5 -4 Balance of Payments (In percent of GDP) l ’ , .’ I ’ I I , -10 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ National accounts year beginning July 1. 2/ Fiscal year beginning April 1. 3/ Core consumer mice index. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-a- Figure 2. Botswana: Selected Exchange Rate Indicators (1995=100) 120 Bilateral Exchange Rates, January 1995-August 2000 1 IO - (Foreign currency per pula) loo ye _-_-- -. *-__----I r----___- _ _ S?uth African rand -- . ---- --_-mm__ ----. 90 - 80 - 70 - 60 - 50 “““““~~““‘~“““““““““““1”“““““‘1”’1””~”’ 1995 1996 \997 1998 1999 moo 120 110 100 90 80 ~ 70 I 60 50 120 - 120 Effective Exchange Rates, January 1995August 2000 110 _ (Foreign currency per pula) - 110 100 -- - Real effective exchange rates 11 - 100 90 - ----m-m ---- - 90 80 - - 80 70 - - 70 60 - - 60 50 I I A I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 81 I I I I I I I, I I I, I I I I I I 81 I I I ,I I I, I I I I I, I I I I I,,,. I ,I I 50 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 I20 120 110 100 Ratio of Tradable to Non-tradable Consumer Prices 1995:Ql-2OOO:Q3 90 - 90 80 - 80 70 - 70 60 - 60 tn <” _I” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Using the core consumer price index for South Africa. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 8. Botswana’s current account remained in surplus in 1999 (the last period for which data are available) (Table 5). This largely reflects the recovery in the global diamond market and a rebound in diamond earnings (which accounts for approximately 70 percent of Botswana’s export receipts), This resulted in a substantial overall balance and a buildup of reserves to nearly $6.3 billion. The Bank of Botswana offset the resulting liquidity impact with the sale of its certificates.5 9. Botswana’s government budget returned to surplus in 1999/2000 and a surplus is expected in 2000/01 (Table 6). The swing from a deficit in 1998/99-the first in nearly 20 years-mainly reflects a sharp drop and then a rebound in mineral revenue. (Mineral revenue comprises more than one-half of government income and varies directly with world diamond prices). The growth of government spending slowed in 1999/2000 and in 2000/01 but still outpaced income growth. The proposed budget for 2001/02 projects a small deficit, mainly due to large budgeted increases in development and recurrent spending. Budget authority may be increased further because an annual wage adjustment for public employees was not factored into the estimates.6 10. Thirty-six percent of Botswana’s adult population is thought to be infected with the virus HIV (Figure 3). Demographic projections indicate that the number of AIDS cases could more than double over the next ten years and that the working-age population could actually decline. The government has responded to this humanitarian and economic tragedy with an extensive education and publicity campaign, drug treatment for pregnant women (to reduce the risk of transmission to their unborn babies), home care for the sick, and support for orphans. III. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 11. Economic growth is expected to continue at a rapid pace in 2000/01, reflecting the rise in diamond production during the second half of calendar-year 2000. Beginning in 2001/02, however, economic growth will slow sharply and remain at a lower rate over the medium term, compared with the average growth of nearly 6 percent recorded over the past ten years (see table below). In the near term, the decline in growth reflects the plateau in diamond production reached in 2000, while in the medium term declining output growth 5 By end-2000, the stock of Bank of Botswana certificates was P 3.8 billion, or about five times the level of reserve money. The liquidity impact of the increase in reserves was also offset by a rise in government deposits at the central bank. 6 The government has retained a consultant to study public pay in view of the retention problems within the government. The 2001 wage increase will be set following release of this study. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 10 - Figure 3. Botswana: HIV Infection and Working-Age Population, 1998-20 IO 38 38 HIV Infection (Percent of adult population) 35 35 32 32 29 26 29 26 430 425 420 415 410 405 400 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Working Age Population :In thousands of workers) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 430 425 420 415 410 405 400 Sources: ABT Associates South Africa Inc.; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- reflects the macroeconomic consequences of AIDS.7 The macroeconomic impact of this pandemic and the uncertainties surrounding it are discussed in Section V.8 Inflation will moderate in light of the unchanged monetary policy objectives and the assumption that inflation targeting will be successful in South Africa, Botswana’s major trading partner. Medium-Term Scenario, 1999-2005 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Real GDP l/ 7.7 7.8 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.3 CPI 7.4 8.6 6.0 5.0 4.5 4.5 4.5 Fiscal balance 2/3/ 5.5 3.5 2.9 1.0 -1.3 -2.3 -3.8 Current account 3/ 10 17.0 11.9 10.0 7.9 5.8 3.7 l/ Year beginning July 1 2/ Year beginning April 1, 3/ Percent of GDP. 12. Botswana’s fiscal surplus is projected to decline over the medium term and move into deficit because of the expected plateau in diamond revenue and continued spending growth. The medium-term scenario assumes that public consumption would rise as a percentage of GDP, reflecting increasing demands related to AIDS.9A current account surplus is expected to be maintained in the medium term, but the surplus will shrink because the assumed slowdown in diamond export earnings growth and rising public and private consumption will raise imports. It is likely that progress in poverty reduction will slow as the AIDS crisis worsens (Box 1). 7 The base-case scenario outlined in the midterm review of NDP 8 shows GDP growth of 4% percent in the three years to 2002/03. As in the staffs base case, inflation would decline to 5% percent by the end of this period, there would be a small fiscal surplus, a surplus in the external current account, and official reserves would rise. ’ Two recent studies indicate that AIDS will reduce potential economic growth by 1 L/z - 3 percentage points a year. See Section V of this report for details. 9 The fiscal implications of AIDS are discussed further in Section. V. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 1. Poverty in Botswana Poverty is an important concern in Botswana. The most recent poverty survey, conducted in 1993194, estimated that 47 percent of individuals were below the poverty line, about the same as the average for sub-Saharan Africa. For several reasons, this surprisingly high poverty measure for Botswana almost certainly overstates the current situation and understates the difference with other countries in the region. First, Botswana’s economy has grown by about 40 percent since the survey, raising the incomes (and consumption) of the poor. Second, since the survey, there has been a migration from rural to more urban areas, and, with this, an increase in the nonfarm informal sector. This unmeasured income growth is believed to have benefited the poorer members of society. Third, Botswana’s poverty data line underlying the 1993194 estimate was higher than the US$l per day commonly used to assess poverty in other countries, skewing the comparison made above. Finally, a considerable part of Botswana’s income is from diamonds, and much of this accrues to the government, which then provides health, education, and other services to the population. This provision of services is not captured in poverty incidence measures, but can be seen in other social indicators. Unfortunately, AIDS will cause poverty to rise in the period ahead. The recent study on AIDS by the Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis (BIDPA) estimated that one-fourth of households will lose an income earner to AIDS (see main text). This tragic consequence may be understated because more recent demographic projections show a higher AIDS death rate than those underlying the BIDPA study. Until recently, the government’s poverty alleviation plan focused on promoting economic growth outside the mining sector and, therefore, bolstering employment opportunities. The main thrust has been to promote the private sector, for example, by supporting education and health services (to improve labor quality), and to build needed infrastructure. Other policies have been aimed at small businesses with varying degrees of success. With the AIDS crisis, the government has begun to provide direct support to alleviate suffering. IV. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS 13. Discussions with the authorities focused on monetary and fiscal policies against the background of the anticipated slowdown in economic growth outlined above. The macroeconomic consequences of AIDS were also discussed, as were other key impediments to future economic growth. A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies 14. The Bank of Botswana operates under a pegged exchange rate regime, but at the same time it adjusts interest rates to achieve low inflation. Bank of Botswana officials indicated that they had been able to pursue these two objectives simultaneously, even though capital controls had been lifted in 1999 because capital markets in Botswana had not yet Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- become well developed.” The officials explained that Botswana’s financial markets lacked sufficient depth for interest rate differences between Botswana and major financial markets (including South Africa) to induce large capital flows. In particular, shares on Botswana’s stock exchange are somewhat illiquid, and ownership of the main pula-denominated asset, the Bank of Botswana Certificate (BOBC), is restricted to residents. As a result, the Bank of Botswana can maintain the pegged exchange rate by buying or selling foreign currency at announced rates while also influencing domestic credit and interest rates through the sale of its certificates. 15. Bank of Botswana officials emphasized that pegged exchange rate arrangement was important because Botswana was a small economy, highly dependent on imports from the rand area.” The mission agreed that the arrangement was the appropriate nominal anchor for the reasons outlined by the authorities and saw no need to reopen the debate on the exchange rate regime. Preserving the exchange rate peg was also important because current reporting lags in real and labor market data would make it difficult to implement an alternative nominal anchor, such as an inflation target. Nevertheless, the mission commented that the exchange rate should not be defended at any cost in the event of large-scale capital outflows similar to those that had been seen in some other countries with pegged exchange rate arrangements. 16. The mission agreed that increases in policy interest rates aimed at cooling demand were appropriate in view of the clear signs of buoyant demand and capacity constraints in parts of the economy over the past two years. The mission, however, reiterated its view that the lack of timely data in certain areas hampered policy decisions and observed that it might be difficult to know when to change interest rates. Bank officials indicated that they would monitor developments-especially credit growth and inflation--carefully in deciding the policy setting. The mission agreed and said that, for the medium term, the Bank of Botswana needed to strengthen its monitoring of both the real economy and of capital flows. This would entail improved data collection (including by the Central Statistics Office) lo Other factors allowing monetary policy to pursue these objectives include capital controls in South Africa and the large reserve position of the Bank of Botswana that facilitates sterilization of capital flows. Botswana’s external reserves are over $6 billion, or approximately equivalent of one year of GDP. The Bank of Botswana has issued guidelines to commercial banks limiting foreign currency exposure and monitors these limits weekly. Currently, banks close open positions overnight. ” The Bank of Botswana acts as the government’s agent in implementing exchange rate policy. Currently, the pula is pegged to a basket comprising the SDR (to account for advanced-economy trading partners) and the South African rand. The rand is heavily weighted to reflect Botswana’s trade relationships (more than 70 percent of Botswana’s imports are from South Africa). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- and more research. The Bank of Botswana representatives welcomed this suggestion and indicated that it was in line with their work program.12 17. The experience since exchange controls were lifted in February 1999 shows only small capital flows despite large interest rate differentials with other countries. There has been some rise in foreign currency deposits at domestic banks (equivalent to a capital outflow) and some increase in foreign borrowing by domestic banks (a capital inflow), but these were seen by the authorities as small and related to normal portfolio shifts. However, commercial bank representatives indicated that customers with the ability to borrow in South Africa (for example, fn-ms with parent companies there) were now borrowing in rand because of changes in interest rate differentials in favor of rand funding. Moreover, the staff emphasized that over time it is likely that market participants will find ways to take advantage of interest rate differentials. These developments could limit the ability of the Bank of Botswana to pursue an independent interest rate policy and dampen its effectiveness in controlling domestic demand. 18. The mission raised the issue of the real exchange rate in the context of future growth prospects in the nonmining private sector. Bank of Botswana officials stated that the largely unchanged real effective value of the pula over the past 20 years was evidence that its level was about right (see Figure 2). The mission observed that there was some merit in this conclusion, but noted that a more competitive real exchange rate could help Botswana achieve faster growth in the nonmining private sector and therefore promote economic diversification.13 The best way to achieve this, given the pegged nominal exchange rate, was to follow policies aimed at preserving domestic price stability, including prudent fiscal policy, and maintaining a market-friendly environment to lower the cost of doing business. 19. Transition to the recently approved pension scheme for government employees could have significant implications for monetary policy.‘4 In particular, the government announced that it would back the unfunded liabilities of the current pension system but had not decided on the exact modalities. One likely approach was a transfer of government ” The work program includes research into the transmission of monetary policy and liquidity management, as recommended by the August 2000 MAE technical assistance mission. I3 Since 1990, the share of output in Botswana’s nonmining private sector, which is a proxy for the tradable goods sector, has risen from 47 percent of GDP to 5 1 percent in 2000. I4 The government is moving from an unfunded to a funded pension system for its employees. The budget impact will depend on how many current employees elect to switch to the new plan, and could be as high as 4 percent of GDP if all employees do so. The new system features defined contributions, management by a nongovernmental agency, and “portability” of contributions. The latter feature will allow government employees to move to the private sector without loss of their pension savings. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 15- deposits at the central bank to the new pension fund. Is The mission observed that this approach could result in domestic asset inflation if the new pension fund purchased pula- denominated assets quickly, especially given the small size of Botswana’s financial market. 20. The authorities accepted this analysis and indicated that the transfer of funds to the new system would probably be phased in over time. Details, however, could only be worked out after the unfunded liability was calculated for all current employees. The mission agreed that it was premature to make firm plans but urged the authorities to consider the asset price implications of any transition proposal. In particular, the government may need to delay or phase in funding of the pension slowly, with the timing depending on the domestic economy’s ability to absorb the new capital. One indicator of the economy’s readiness in this regard would be a significant reduction in the stock of BOBCs held by the public. In addition, it may be desirable to grant pension fund managers full flexibility in international investment allocation decisions and, for example, waive any requirement to invest a certain percentage of pension assets in Botswana (similar to current insurance company regulations). B. Fiscal Policy 21. Botswana has generally followed responsible fiscal policies and has consolidated its considerable diamond wealth. Indeed, Botswana’s fiscal “guidepost” of using mineral revenue for development purposes and recurrent revenue for recurrent spending has served the country well. Moreover, development spending has been directed toward infrastructure, education, health, and clean water-all areas that will help diversify the economy and also improve the quality of life. However, the 1999 Article IV consultation found that the very large increase in public sector wages (in 1998) and the implementation of supplementary budgets caused unsustainable demand pressures. 22. The mission observed that the budget situation had improved in 1999 and 2000 financial years, in large part due to a rebound in diamond-related revenue, as well as to a slowdown in overall spending growth. The mission welcomed these developments and noted that spending control was very important in Botswana. As was demonstrated in 1998/99, short-run fiscal deficits are easily financed, but high spending levels can result in an overheated economy. In addition, with the front-loading of NDP 8, as well as the supplementary projects added since the plan’s inception, the government’s capacity to implement and monitor road, school, and health clinic construction has been stretched, causing delays and possibly quality concerns. Looking forward, it will be important to control expenditures because future mineral revenue is likely to plateau and because AIDS- ” Estimates of the unfunded liability range widely, from P 2 billion to P 6 billion. A liability in this range could easily be funded using government deposits at the Bank of Botswana of P 22 billion. The 2001/02 budget announcement includes a P 500 million transfer to the new fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- related demand for resources will certainly grow. Moreover, fluctuations in mineral revenue cannot be ruled out. Medium-term spending framework 23. The mission suggested that all government spending plans be formulated in a multiyear framework. Currently, only development expenditures are set in the context of a medium-term plan: recurrent spending, which makes up about 70 percent of the total, is not. Experience in other countries suggests that a multiyear budget, in connection with macroeconomic and revenue projections, can strengthen fiscal discipline, provide a rationale for current spending patterns, and help make the difficult choices related to AIDS. Moreover, in this setting, the practice of regularly scheduled supplementary budgets could be replaced with a contingency line item in the budget as a means of reducing midyear surprises. Using zero-based budgeting, to weed out unnecessary programs, was also discussed. 24. The authorities questioned the need for the staff’s proposal. Ministry of Finance and Development Planning officials explained that steps were being taken to keep development spending within capacity. First, the midterm review of NDP 8 recommended that some already-approved projects be scaled back or moved into the next development plan, NDP 9. Second, the review recommended a “project-wise” implementation schedule be used in NDP 9, so that the timing of future development projects would be consistent with government oversight capabilities and economic productive capacity. The mission welcomed the envisaged changes as a good way to avoid overheating in the construction sector and to relieve pressures on government project management. 25. The mission suggested that large periodic increases in public sector wages could be avoided if annual pay increases were in line with guidelines recommended by the pay commission.‘6 This approach would have reduced the need for the 25 percent government wage increase in 1998, which was partly a catch-up for declining real public sector wages over the preceding four years. That increase contributed to an inflationary impulse, including a spillover into private sector earnings and demand. Ministry of Finance representatives felt that annual pay increases were not always practical because in some years overall spending objectives permitted only a small government salary increase. The mission team then suggested that, if catch-up adjustments could not be avoided, they should perhaps be phased in over a few years to avoid inflationary impulses. 26. Furthermore, the mission observed that budget developments in Botswana were not always easy to interpret, especially by outside analysts, and that uncertainty about the budget could be an impediment to foreign investment. Investors, seeing spending approvals increase through the fiscal year, could conclude that fiscal policy was getting out of control. I6 For 2000/O 1, the National Employment, Manpower and Income Council recommended a 6 percent pay raise to compensate public employees for inflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Ministry of Finance officials acknowledged the potential for confusion but pointed out that actual spending was usually below budget levels.” They added that safeguards were in place to make sure that funds were not wasted and were used for the purposes intended. The mission welcomed these safeguards but stressed that investor perceptions, whether correct or not, were important, especially if Botswana were to attract foreign investment and expertise. A multiyear budget framework would help in this context, as would improved and more timely reporting of government accounts. 27. The spending proposals in the 2001/02 budget underscore the staff’s concerns about unsustainable development spending by the government and uncertainties related to the budget process. The budget, announced on February 6, incorporates a rise in development spending near 30 percent, an increase that is unlikely to be realized because of capacity constraints.‘* Recurrent spending is programmed to go up by a more sustainable 14 percent, but this too may be an overestimate of actual spending because of vacant positions within the government. While these factors suggest actual spending will undershoot the proposed budget, a large annual public salary adjustment (to be announced after May 2001) could push overall spending higher and cause wage cost pressures in the private sector. Tax policies 28. The government is planning to introduce a value-added tax (VAT) in 2002.19 The new VAT would replace the current system of sales taxes and generate additional revenue to make up for anticipated declines in future customs receipts, which are expected to drop as SACU tariffs are lowered.20 The proposed VAT rate of 10 percent is not expected to have a large effect on prices because the existing sales tax rate is also 10 percent. Added revenue would come from broadening the tax base. No other large tax changes were planned.2’ ” In 199912000, recurrent spending was about 5 percent under budget because of staff vacancies, and development spending was 11 percent below budget because of capacity constraints. The 200 1 budget statement does not include revisions for a public sector salary increase because a salary review has not been completed. I8 Part of the increase reflects plans to improve health infrastructure. I9 The VAT bill has been published but not yet approved by parliament. Implementation will be handled by the Customs Department, which is already responsible for the sales tax. The bulk of VAT revenue is expected to be collected at the border on imports. ” Botswana is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). The expected revenue reduction is outlined below. 2’ The 2001 budget adjusts direct tax bands to account for inflation. In addition, the government announced measures to enhance tax collection enforcement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- C. Structural Issues 29. Officials and private sector representatives indicated that shortages of skilled, experienced workers had been a key impediment to economic growth. While Botswana has invested in education and has seen enrollment and literacy rates rise, gains have been relatively recent, and it will take more time before labor force skills catch up with market demands.22 However, progress could be slowed by AIDS, especially if specific groups, such as teachers, are hard hit. The shortage may also reflect difficulties in obtaining work permits for foreign experts. While government officials indicated that there were no policy restrictions on foreign workers, private sector participants observed that some applicants might be discouraged by inefficiencies within the government that slow the process. In addition, a scarcity of serviced land for development projects could hold back growth.23 30. Botswana is planning to privatize some of its parastatal enterprises. A privatization policy document was approved by parliament in April 2000. The Public Enterprise Valuation Agency, which will devise and implement the strategy, is being set up. 31. Botswana has also launched an International Financial Services Center, which is aimed at promoting employment and enhancing skills in the labor force (Box 2). The mission cautioned against a rapid expansion of the center, noting that its growth should not outstrip supervision capabilities.24 32. Botswana is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SAW) and, therefore, does not have a fully independent trade policy. Until very recently, tariff schedules were set almost entirely by South Africa representing SACU. However, a new SACU agreement gives some decisionmaking power to the smaller member countries, including Botswana. The agreement also changes the formula for revenue sharing among the countries to give more resources to the poorer countries. Revenue to Botswana is expected to fall, reflecting not only the effect of Botswana’s high per capita income on the formula, but 22 The mission did not observe significant distortions in labor incentives. Tax rates are low (15 percent), and minimum wages are at levels that are nonbinding for almost all workers. 23 There is a shortage of serviced land for development in the Gaborone area. Land is generally made ready for construction by the government. 24 Botswana’s domestic banking system was found to be sound by the Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department in August 2000. The mission found no evidence to contradict this assessment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 19- Box 2. International Financial Services Center The government of Botswana decided in 1995 to create a fiscal and regulatory environment that would make Botswana a location from which a wide range of financial services can be provided to nonresidents and in currencies other than the pula. The International Financial Service Center (IFSC) is intended to be a low-tax jurisdiction, such as those in Ireland, Luxembourg, or Hong Kong, SAAR rather than a tax haven. The objectives of the IFSC are to l generate employment for Botswana; . enhance the skills base of the Botswana workforce; l diversify and increase the revenue base; and . stimulate economic growth. The incentives package was announced in the 1999 budget speech and provided for in the Income Tax (Amendments) Act 1999. It features 0 a corporate tax rate of 15 percent until 2020; . exemption from withholding taxes in Botswana; . credits for withholding taxes levied in other jurisdictions; and . access to Botswana’s Double Taxation Treaty. The IFSC targets the following types of financial businesses: l fund management-administration, custody, and trustee activities for mutual funds; l banking services-structured financing, bank treasury operations, and asset financing; . insurance-aptive insurance/reinsurance and life assurance; . financial intermediary services-broker services, corporate treasury services, and holding company structures. The following legislative changes have been made: . amendments to the Bank of Botswana Act to provide for the bank to regulate all IFSC activities, except for insurance, which will be regulated by the Registrar of Insurance; . amendments to Proceeds of Serious Crime Act to strengthen money laundering legislation and embody various UN and other directives on abuse of international financial payments structures; . amendments to Income Tax Act 2000; and . new Collective Investments Undertaking (CIU) Act. By end-2000, five tax certificates, including for at least two banks, with a job potential of 100 had been approved by the IFSC. Recruitment and training have started in those projects. Five other applications are under negotiation. With regard to regulations, the Bank of Botswana staff is receiving training in Dublin. Further work would be required in marketing the program, cooperation of government/financial sector/accounting and legal sector, training (in particular IT and accounting), and telecommunications development in terms of costs and quality. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - also reductions in the common external tariff rates and preferential agreements, such as with the European Union.25 This agreement will have longer-term spillover benefits in Botswana, including lower costs and increased competition in previously protected industries. V. HIV/AIDS 33. The implications of the HIV/AIDS pandemic for the humanitarian and economic outlook are of serious concern, and the mission strongly agreed with President Mogae that top priority should be assigned to dealing with this catastrophe. Current measures of HIV prevalence-36 percent of the adult population-and rising mortality provide only a partial and preliminary indication of the enormity of the problem that will emerge over the next five years and beyond. 34. The economic consequences of AIDS are becoming increasingly evident. Larger private firms and official agencies have initiated AIDS awareness programs for their employees, and are adjusting to increases in absentee rates and staff vacancies due to AIDS- related deaths. The cost of private health insurance, paid at varying percentages by employers, has risen sharply because of AIDS, and some businesses have reported that they are recruiting more than the usual number of new staff because of increasing employee deaths. These examples demonstrate how business costs are rising because of AIDS, a trend that will erode competitiveness and work against the government’s diversification objective.26 35. The main macroeconomic impact of AIDS will be a reduction in potential output growth (Box 3). However, the extent to which AIDS lowers observed economic growth and how-quickly this happens will not necessarily correspond to estimates of the AIDS effect. One area of uncertainty stems from difficulties in knowing the true HIV infection rate and the progression of AIDS in those infected. Another uncertainty depends on how productivity and foreign investment are affected. Finally, the observed impact on actual output will further depend on demand factors and on the degree to which employment growth can be maintained for a period through the absorption of those now unemployed. 25 Botswana’s average tariff rate is currently about 15 percent. 26 Consumers are also seeing expenses rise. For example, commercial banks are now requiring AIDS insurance loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 3. The Macroeconomic Impact of AIDS in Botswana Botswana has the highest HIV prevalence rate in the world. The figures are alarming: thirty-six percent of the adult population is estimated to be infected with the AIDS virus; the prevalence rate in the two largest cities is thought to have leveled off at 45 percent; the death rate per 1,000 population has accelerated from 15 in 1990 to 30 in 2000 and is projected to reach 45 by 2007; and, on current projections, one child in five would be an orphan by 2010. There is substantial uncertainty about the macroeconomic consequences of AIDS. A recent study by the Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis estimated that AIDS would reduce real economic growth in the nonmining sector by 1% percentage points a year by 2010, compared with a no-AIDS counterfactual. Using a more up-to-date projection of Botswana’s labor force-the labor pool is now expected to begin to fall in the next few years-the staff estimates a larger AIDS impact, possibly a 3 percentage point reduction in potential economic growth over the same horizon. This would come about because of a decline in the labor force and a smaller capital stock due to lower private savings. Output growth could be even more adversely affected if productivity growth declines or if foreign investment and its embedded expertise dries up. However, effective and affordable treatment would reduce the consequences of a shrinking labor force. Studies of AIDS and the macro economy do not shed sufficient light on how quickly output and other variables will be affected. One problem is that because HIV infection rates are estimated from nonrandom samples, there is uncertainty about the full extent of the epidemic. There is also uncertainty about how quickly full-blown AIDS will develop among those infected. Another source of uncertainty is that, because of excess unemployment in Botswana, vacancies caused by AIDS could in principle be filled by those currently unemployed. The magnitude of this effect depends on skill matches, which cannot be analyzed quantitatively without detailed data (which are unavailable). There is also uncertainty about how quickly savings, investment, and, therefore, the capital stock will be affected. The staffs medium-term scenario assumes that the impact of AIDS on the full economy will build slowly but steadily over the next few years. The sharp fall in output growth in 200 l-02 mainly reflects a plateau in diamond production and demand conditions. However, the impact of AIDS is assumed to become increasingly evident in 2003, when demographic projections show a sharp rise in deaths. 36. There are indications that the medium-term risks of AIDS might well be on the downside. First, there is a risk that productivity and investment growth-factors that have a particularly important impact on the economic outlook-may decline at a faster rate than assumed, especially if the growing incidence of sickness and death severely weakens economic confidence and activity. Second, fiscal pressures are likely to intensify, and public spending may be diverted from infrastructure and other areas that add to potential growth to build up the health infrastructure and support more expensive treatments. 37. To address the AIDS threat, the authorities have undertaken a multi-pronged approach. First, they are attempting to curtail the spread of the HIV virus through education and prevention programs, and by providing antiretroviral drugs to pregnant women to prevent mother-to-baby transmission. Second, they are alleviating some of the related suffering by providing home-based care and support to orphans. Each of these initiatives has fiscal implications, but, taken together, they appear to be within Botswana’s means, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - particularly if the rise in mineral revenue in 2000 is sustained. The mission strongly commended the authorities for undertaking these programs. 38. A key question is whether antiretroviral drug treatments for all HIV-positive patients are economically viable. The mission noted that the general introduction of these treatments, at current prices, would almost certainly represent an unsustainable burden on the economy, especially if the take-up rate were high.27 If current efforts to lower the costs of the necessary treatments are successful, however, the scope for funding advanced therapies from domestic resources could substantially improve. Nevertheless, offsetting reductions in lower- priority areas of public spending may also be required, and additional support would probably need to come from international sources.28 In addition, the mission was told that the domestic health sector infrastructure for supporting widespread use of combination drug therapies would need to be upgraded before these treatments could be made generally available. VI. STAFF APPRAISAL 39. The macroeconomic situation in Botswana has improved since the last consultation, Economic growth rebounded in 1999/2000, the fiscal deficit in 1998/99 has been erased and the current account surplus has risen. A recovery in the world diamond market largely accounts for these gains, underscoring the country’s heavy reliance on this single commodity. Inflation increased over the past 24 months (as in South Africa), but now appears to be under control and is in line with underlying inflation in South Africa. Moreover, overheating in the economy may be beginning to ease. Credit growth has started to slow, and there are reports from the business community of a welcome slack in the construction industry. Still, because of the paucity of timely data, especially for the real economy and the labor market, it is too early to know whether underlying inflation pressures are abating. 40. Botswana’s foremost economic and social policy challenge is AIDS. The government has appropriately targeted AIDS education and awareness and mother-to-child transmission as the first steps in combating the spread of the AIDS virus. It will take some time to tell whether these efforts are effective. In terms of alleviating suffering, the staff supports the government’s financial support to orphans and to the care of AIDS patients at 27 Almost 300,000 persons are thought to be infected with the HIV virus. Assuming annual drug therapy costs of US$lO,OOO per patient, total costs would be US$3 billion, or approximately 60 percent of GDP. ” The Gates Foundation and the Merck and Company Partnership will provide US$lOO million in AIDS assistance. Other partnerships and support have been arranged with U.S. medical schools and other drug companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - home. There may, however, be room to refine the implementation details of the home care program. 41. A key uncertainty is whether it will be economically feasible to provide advanced medical treatment to all those infected with the virus. Unfortunately, it is too early to evaluate treatment options from an economic point of view because technical questions- what is the appropriate treatment, what additional facilities will be needed, and at what prices drugs will be made available-remain unanswered. The staff hopes that these issues can be addressed quickly and is ready to help evaluate the macroeconomic consequences of treatment options when appropriate. 42. Over the next few years, Botswana will face difficult choices among public spending priorities. One area of growing pressure will be AIDS-related demands, including treatment and relief of human suffering. In this context, it will be important to consider both financial and real economy constraints. As recent experience has demonstrated, Botswana can easily finance deficits in the short run, but the speed at which construction projects can be completed is limited, as are resources in certain areas, such as health. It will be important for development projects-including for AIDS treatment-to be vetted in terms of economic constraints and the government’s monitoring capacity. Similarly, new clinics and laboratories will need to be staffed, and it may be difficult to find qualified individuals, especially because AIDS is a continent-wide crisis. The 2001 budget, with its large spending increases that are in part AIDS-related, underscores the difficulties that lie ahead. 43. Fiscal pressure will also come from the anticipated plateau in diamond revenue and declines in SACU revenue. Next year’s introduction of a new VAT will help, but controlling spending growth should be a priority. This will not only help preserve Botswana’s sound public finances, but also have the additional benefit of reducing the government’s role in the economy. Raising other tax rates could undermine the competitive advantage that Botswana maintains in the area of direct taxes. 44. Budget mechanisms to help accomplish spending restraint are mostly in place, but further improvements are needed. The Minister of Finance is already working to strengthen the budget process for development spending, and those improvements planned should help to avoid future problems linked to capacity and implementation constraints. These efforts should be strengthened by including the entire spending side of the budget- development and recurrent- in a medium-term framework that includes macroeconomic and revenue projections. Revised reporting of Botswana’s public finances could make the country more attractive to foreign investors. 45. The staff endorses Botswana’s exchange rate peg as the appropriate nominal anchor. It also endorses the increases in the Bank of Botswana bank rate over the past two years that were made possible in the fixed exchange rate environment by the early country’s stage of capital market development. Deciding the next change in rates may be difficult, however, because the real economy indicators needed to guide policies are reported with long lags. To improve decision making in the future, the Bank of Botswana will need to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - pursue its research program vigorously-an effort that will require more timely data on the real economy. 46. The staff welcomes the Bank of Botswana’s emphasis on bank supervision. However, demands for supervision will increase as the new offshore financial services center develops, and too rapid an expansion could put success at risk. The staff, therefore, urges a measured expansion of the center so that it does not grow ahead of supervision capabilities. 47. Long reporting lags, especially in the national accounts and some fiscal data, are a problem that hampers assessing macroeconomic conditions. In addition, different reporting years are used for data for the major sectors, further complicating economic analysis. These issues, along with a lack of clarity in budget reporting, pose problems for policymakers and could deter foreign investors, who may find Botswana’s economy difficult to understand. The staff urges the authorities to implement speedily recommendations of recent technical assistance in balance of payments statistics, and welcomes plans to introduce quarterly national accounts with a one quarter lag. It recommends, however, that additional resources be devoted to presentation. Moreover, Botswana, which has expressed interest in participating in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), should move forcefully to complete that process in order to address comprehensively deficiencies in its statistical system. 48. The staff notes the authorities’ intention to eliminate by 2006 the multiple currency practice arising out of the Foreign Exchange Risk-Sharing Scheme, which was abandoned in 1990. It therefore recommends temporary approval of the multiple currency practice until March 3 I,2002 or the conclusion of the next Article IV consultation with Botswana, whichever is earlier. 49. It is recommended that Botswana remain on the 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - VI. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to Botswana’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Section 3, in light of the 1999 Article IV consultation with Botswana conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in SM/Ol/67, Botswana maintains a multiple currency practice arising from the Foreign Exchange Risk-Sharing Scheme applicable to outstanding external loans obtained by certain public enterprises before October 1, 1990, which is subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 3. 3. In view of Botswana’s discontinuance of the Foreign Exchange Risk-Sharing Scheme in 1990, and of its intention to eliminate the multiple currency practice by 2006, when the last loan under the scheme will mature, the Fund approves the retention by Botswana of the multiple currency practice until March 3 1,2002 or the conclusion of the next Article IV consultation with Botswana, whichever is earlier. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table I. Botswana: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2003 19% 1997 I998 1999 moo Est. 2001 2002 2003 Pmicctions (Annual pcrccntagc change. unless olhcnwsc indtcatcd) National mcom and prices Real GDP I/ GDP dcflaror I/ Consumer pticcs (annual avcragc) Consumer prim mmi of period) Nommal GDP (m bdhons ofpulal I/ Diamond pmducuon (m millions ofcants) 5.6 8.1 4.1 7.7 7.8 37 18.3 7.6 -1.2 12.5 8.0 5.5 IO.1 9.0 6.4 7.4 8.6 6.0 9.6 7.8 b.4 6.9 8.7 5.5 17.7 20.2 21.5 25.2 28.7 31.4 17.7 17.7 19.7 21.3 25.2 25.5 3.5 4.5 5.0 5.0 34.0 25.2 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.0 36.9 26.0 ExporIs ofgoods. f.o.b. (in US dollar terms) Imports of goods, f.o.b. (fin U.S. dollar terms) TmN0fuad.s Nomml elTecnvc exchange RIG (dcpnxmmn -, U Real effecrive excbangc rate (dcpreciauon -) U Nominal avenge exchange ntc (pula per U.S. dollar) Nommal average cxchangc RW @ula per Soulh African rand) 2.7 -8.6 18.0 4.9 -1.6 3.3 0.8 27.2 -26.5 28.7 3.1 2.4 31.1 3.6 0.0 7.2 12.7 -0.8 5.6 10.2 2.0 1.0 -3.7 -0.3 -1.5 0.5 -2.4 0.8 1.0 0.0 3.7 4.2 4.6 5.4 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 2.7 7.7 0.0 2.6 7.4 0.0 Cmrnl goucmnlcn, linancc 3/ Total rwenuc and gmnls Of which: mmenl rwmue Southern African Customs Umon (SACU) receipts TONI cxpcndmuc and net kndmg 22.2 35.3 12.0 -7.3 55.8 8.3 4.6 4.7 IO.3 40.5 28.6 -31.9 109.9 13.0 5.2 4.5 8.1 32.3 6.4 52.9 9.6 4.8 8.1 8.0 21.5 17.3 21.6 22.4 15.0 13.9 17.7 10.2 (Twclvc-month perccntagc change, unless otherwise indicated) Money and banking Net foreign asseu, Net domestic assets Net domestic credit Net clslms on government Clatms on nongovemmcnt Other items (net) Money and qua, money (M2) Broad money (M3) 4/ Velowy (GDP relawe to MZ) 45.3 -51.3 -IS.8 -11.8 I.1 -78.0 IS.1 26.9 5.6 IS.0 24.3 8.3 I I.5 17.7 -13.3 -22.6 -6.2 -22.2 -16.2 -147.9 -20.6 1.2 -33.7 -22.5 -I 12.6 -24.9 -5.3 -29.2 -20.2 5.6 55.5 37.9 I I.3 9.5 52.8 -27.7 -24.4 0.0 0.0 25.0 33.7 18.4 12.9 II.7 18.4 25.6 25.0 5.3 4.4 3.9 4.9 4.5 (In percent per annum) 23.3 15.2 -16.1 -16.0 -21.2 -21.0 -19.2 -19.0 8.3 7.3 0.0 0.0 9.5 3.9 4.5 4.5 Inwest and cnxbl 5/ Bank of Botswana lcndmg rate Commcrclal banks Prime lendmg rate Deposit we II.00 12.50 12.50 13.25 14.25 14.00 14.00 14.81 IS.75 8.52 8.76 9.66 IO.13 (In percent of GDP, unless otberwiw indicated) 14.50 IO.56 23.0 23.0 30.0 36.8 26.6 29.3 30.9 32.1 12.9 12.0 12.1 12.0 II.4 13.8 13.8 13.8 IO.1 10.9 16.1 24.8 15.2 IS.5 17.0 18.3 37.0 40.9 43.3 35.9 45.2 42.2 41.7 41.0 IS.4 18.2 14.9 5.5 3.6 3.0 0.4 -2.2 21.6 22.6 28.4 30.4 41.6 39.3 41.3 43.1 Central gowllmenl tinancc 31 Total revcnuc and grams Currcnl expendnurc Capital expenditure Overall balance (including grants) Pnmvy balsncc Domestic financing Foreign financmg 44.4 24.3 13.4 7.8 8.4 -8.3 0.5 41.1 35.7 47.3 45.1 43.2 25.1 27.1 25.3 27.2 26. I 13.7 12.8 12.4 I I.7 10.8 4.5 -6. I 5.5 3.5 -1.6 4.9 -5.7 5.8 3.9 -I .6 -4.9 5.2 -5.4 -3.1 0.4 0. I -0.1 6.4 42.8 40.6 28.6 29. I 10.8 10.8 3.4 0.7 Deb-service ratio (in percent of cxpons of goods and sctwca) 10.4 13.8 3.4 13.9 3.3 10.0 17.0 II.9 13.5 14.5 14.3 II.3 9.0 2.8 3.3 2.9 2.5 2.1 (In mdlion5 0fU.S. dollars. unless Mhawse md~calcd) 10.0 7.9 6.9 5.2 I.8 1.6 Change in reserves (mcreru -) -150.2 -440.4 -265.8 -288.6 -653.2 -426. I -339.4 -239.2 chs ofxclal mrva (end of pcrmd) 5,234 5.675 5.94 I 6.229 6,882 7,309 7,648 7.887 (III months of wnportr of goods and scrwces) 34.7 28.8 35.7 37.5 38.6 36.4 35.4 34.0 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates and pm~cctmns. II Yeal begmnmg July I. 2i Annual average. 31 Year beginning April I. 41 Money and quasi money (M2) plus Bank of Botswana Certificates. 51 As of end-December. For 2OI30. as of end-June. 6l Medium- and long-ten pubhc and pubhcly guaranteed debt outstanding. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2: Botswana: Sectoral GDP and Savings-Investment Balances, 19996/97-2003/04 I/ I996/91 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 2OQoM) 1 200 I/O? 2OOUO3 2003104 Est. Projections Public Private Gross investment Public Private (including changes in stock) Net exports of goods and services -121.6 -25.3 Exports of goods and services 723.1 1.088.4 Imports of goods and services -844.8 -1.113.7 Gross domestic savings 2.961.9 2.019.3 Public 1.393.8 961.4 Private 1.568.1 1,058.O GDP at market prices 17.740.2 20.162.6 Consumption 58.2 57.5 Public 27.7 27.0 Private 30.5 30.4 Gmss investment Public Private (including changes in stock) 26.0 30.0 12.6 13.4 13.3 16.7 Net exports of goods and services -0.7 -0.1 Exports of goods and services 4.1 5.4 Imports of goods and services -4.8 -5.5 Gross domestic savings 16.7 10.0 Public 7.9 4.8 Private 8.8 5.2 Real GDP OJWhiCh Agricuhrc Mining Manufacturing Water and electricity Construction Trade and hotels Transport Finance and business services General government 5.6 8.1 4.1 7.7 7.8 3.7 3.5 3.5 -7.5 5.9 -7.6 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 5.8 9.5 -2.8 8.3 15.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.7 5.4 5.7 7.5 5.1 5.6 6.0 6.3 4.6 9.9 12.9 8.6 7.0 6.7 4.3 4.5 5.5 4.3 II.5 7.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 13.9 4.7 5.6 10.3 6.5 6.8 6.6 5.0 4.3 9.1 16.2 9.7 4.3 7.1 5.7 5.2 I .2 9.7 9.0 10.2 7.5 7.3 5.6 6.0 8.3 9.3 6.3 2.9 6.6 5.0 4.5 4.5 GDP deflator 7.6 -1.2 12.5 8.0 5.5 4.5 4.0 4.0 Nominal GDP 24.9 13.7 6.8 17.1 13.9 9.2 8.5 8.5 Consumer prices (annual average) 2/ 9.0 6.4 1.4 8.6 6.0 5.0 4.5 4.5 10.318.6 11,589.l 4.908.1 53452.9 5.410.5 6.136.1 4.603.9 6,056. I 2239.6 2.695.5 2,364.3 3.360.5 (In millions of pula) 15.252.0 15.349.0 18.158.3 6,578.a 73524.5 9,183.3 X.673.2 7,824.4 8,975.0 7.917.2 6,713.g 8,4 15.6 3.333.2 2.934.5 3,451.o 4.583.9 3,779.3 43964.6 102.2 -507.0 43 I .5 1,491.7 1,681.S 2.200.3 -19389.4 -2,188.7 -1.768.8 3,986.7 49673.8 3,673.9 -1,361.6 -1,295.o 1.628.2 5.348.2 5.968.8 23045.7 21.523.7 25.207.6 28,720.2 (In percent ofGDP) 70.9 60.9 63.2 30.6 29.9 32.0 40.3 31.0 3 I .2 36.8 26.6 29.3 15.5 Il.6 12.0 21.3 15.0 17.3 0.5 -2.0 1.5 6.9 6.7 7.7 -6.5 -8.7 -6.2 18.5 18.5 12.8 -6.3 -5.1 5.7 24.8 23.7 7.1 (Annual change in percent) 20.066.9 22.120.1 24,301.3 10,203.6 11.346.4 12.529.5 9.863.3 10.773.7 11,771.S 9,676.2 10.919.9 12.340.9 3.584.1 4.709.0 5.110.9 6,092. I 6.2 10.9 7.229.9 363.7 2.3 19.9 -I v956.2 3.382.3 1.190.9 2,191.4 279.4 186.1 2.379.7 2,44 1.6 -2,100.3 -2.255.5 2.915.1.. 2.349.2 -526.9 . 3,441.9 3 I ,352.O 34.018.7 36,925.5 64.0 65.0 65.8 32.5 33.4 33.9 31.5 31.7 31.9 30.9 32.1 33.4 II.4 13.8 13.8 19.4 18.3 19.6 1.2 0.8 0.5 7.4 7.0 6.6 -6.2 -6.2 -6. I 10.8 8.6 6.4 3.8 -1.5 7.0 10.1 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Historical data are based on export and impon data from the national accounts. which differ significantly from balance of payments data. 2/ Calendar year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. Botswana: Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of Botswana, 1994-2000 l/ (In millions of pula; end of period) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sep. Foreign assets Balances at foreign banks 21 Treasury bills and securities 2/ Pula Fund Liquidity portfolio Matched assets/liability portfolio Fund accounts Holding of SDRs Reserve position Loans and advances to financial institutions Fixed assets Other assets Assets = liabilities Reserve money Currency in circulation Currency outside banks Pula currency in banks Bankers’ deposits Private sector time deposits Bank of Botswana Certificates oustanding Bankers Others Government deposits Capita1 and reserves Paid-up capital General reserve Revaluation reserve Other liabilities 11,960.6 13,249. I 19,090.7 21.618.5 26,485.4 28,852.3 32.313.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.810.4 4,247.9 5,394.2 17,654.l 23.561.9 24,453.7 28,196.O 7,701.5 7,539.8 12,689.6 3,721.3 2,545.2 4,074.9 3.790.5 1,282.6 I ,258.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 166.0 203.4 238.6 243.1 378.2 323.7 326.8 101.3 118.9 141.3 152.8 205.2 180.1 200.9 64.8 84.5 91.3 90.3 173.0 143.6 125.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 83.8 96.1 98.5 100.0 108.0 .-122.0 131.3 18.1 23.6 17.1 11.9 18.5 16.4 24.9 12J62.5 13,369.4 19,206.3 21,730.4 26,611.9 28,990.7 32.469.4 391.5 405.4 453.3 572.0 302.5 318.5 355.8 417.1 194.9 222.7 247. I 275.7 107.6 95.9 108.7 141.4 89.0 86.8 97.5 155.0 45.9 47.8 46.7 62.7 I ,450.9 1,963.8 2,815.7 3,308.2 928.5 I ,459.7 1,847.1 2,424.2 522.4 504.1 968.6 883.9 6,704.5 6,460.4 7,203.l 15,364.0 2,922.8 3,3 19.7 6,085.6 1,866.O 3.6 3.6 3.6 25.0 234.0 271.5 327.4 1,600.O 2,685.2 3.044.6 5,754.6 241.0 546.8 1,172.3 1,833.0 557.5 707.3 807.9 651.4 497.7 606.8 523.4 352.7 403.7 481.0 145.0 203.2 42.4 209.6 201.1 212.8 25.7 171.9 179.5 3,246.2 4,230.2 3,994.6 2.257.8 2,809.O 2,705.5 988.4 1,421.2 1,289.l 18,954.8 20,199.4 23,130.5 3.201.6 3,387.3 4,152.5 25.0 25.0 25.0 1.600.0 1.600.0 1,600.O 1,576.6 l,762.3 2,527.5 476.2 194.1 195.4 Source: Bank of Botswana. I/ Effective January 1994, balances with banks and treasury bills and securities have been broken down into Pula Fund. liquidity portfolio, and matched assets/liability portfolio. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. Monetary Survey, 1994-2000 1994 1995 I996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Net foreign assets 12.026.9 13.346.3 19,392.l 22.302.8 27.728.5 30.036.7 33,539.4 Bank of Botswana 11.960.6 13.249. I 19.090.7 21.618.5 26.485.4 28.852.3 32.313.3 Assets 11.960.6 13249. I 19.090.7 21.618.5 26.485.4 28.852.3 32.313.3 Liabilities 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Commercial banks 66.3 97.2 301.4 684.3 1.243.1 1.184.4 1.226.1 ASSCtS 172.1 196.1 453.0 804.7 1,414.7 1345.5 1.573.1 Liabilities -105.8 -9x.9 -151.6 -I 20.4 -171.6 -161.1 -347.0 Net domestic assets -9.669. I -10.935.9 -16.5443 -18.742.6 -22,969. I -24.075.1 -21.456.1 Nel domestic credit -4.874.3 -4.700.8 -5,445.6 -13.500.0 -16.276.6 -16,182.3 -18.526.2 Net claims on the government -6.7 16.8 -6.477.2 -7.242.4 -15.391.6 -19.227.2 -20250.6 -23,178.5 Bank of Botswana -6.704.5 -6.460.4 -7.203.7 -15.364.0 -18,954.S -20.199.4 -23,130.j Commercial banks -12.3 -16.8 -38.1 -33.6 -212.4 -51.2 48.0 Claims on nongovernment ls842.5 1.776.4 1.796.8 1.897.6 2.950.6 4.068.3 4,652.3 Clanos on parastatals 141.9 94.7 70.5 61.4 266.7 527.6 535.4 Claims on the private sector I ,694.6 1.681.7 1.726.3 1.836.2 2.683.9 3.648.4 4.116.9 Ojwhich : households 626.6 781.8 849.5 943.0 1.389.5 1.995.0 plivale enterprises 953. I 777.9 776.5 832.1 1.071.4 1.653.4 Other items (net) -t.794.8 -6.235.2 -I 1,098.7 -5.242.6 -6.692.5 -7;892.8 -8.930.5 O/which. valuation adjustment -7JO3.7 -8.546.6 -14,880.5 -5.334.8 -7.603.0 -8.499.6 -10.1858 Money plus quasi money (M2) 2.3S7.7 2.410.4 2.847.8 3,560.2 4.x9.3 59961.6 6.082.7 Money (MI) 78J.0 818.3 886. I 969.0 1,320.4 1.532.9 I .599.0 Quasi money 1,572.l 1.592.1 1.961.7 2,591.2 3.438.9 4.428.7 4.483.7 Memorandum ilems: Broad money (M3)Il Ojwhich : Bank of Botswana Certificates Broad money (M4)/2 O/which: / oreign currency accounts 2.880.1 3.537.3 4.488.8 5.316.1 6,679.0 8.486.2 522.4 1.126.9 1.641.0 1,755.9 1.919.7 2.714.4 3,756.3 4.785.0 5.797.9 7,618.4 9.58 I .8 219.0 296.2 481.8 939.4 1.171.4 8.597.6 9,797.6 Net foreign assets Nel domestic as?.ets Net domestic c&it Net chms on the government Claims on nongovernment Claims on parastatals Claims on the private sector Of which : households private enterprises Other items (net) Money plus quasi money (M2) Broad money (M3)Il Broad money (M4)/2 Net foreign assets 72.0 56.0 250.8 102.2 152.4 48.5 Net domestic assets -59.0 -53.7 -232.7 -77.2 -118.7 -23.2 Net domestic credit -38.8 1.4 -30.9 -282.8 -78.0 2.0 Net claims on the government -52.3 10.2 -31.7 -286.4 -107.6 -21.5 Claims on nongovernment 13.5 -2.8 0.8 3.5 29.6 23.5 Claims on panstatals 2.6 -2.3 -1.0 -0.3 5.8 5.5 Claims on the private sector 10.9 -0.5 I.9 3.9 21.8 20.3 Of which : households -0.3 5.7 2.8 3.3 12.5 12.1 private enterprises -1.4 -7.4 -0.1 2.0 6.1 12.2 Other items (net) -20.2 -61.1 -20 I .8 205.6 -40.7 -25.2 Money plus quasi money (M2) 13.0 2.2 IS.1 25.0 33.7 25.3 Broad m~ley (M3Yl 14.0 21.9 39.5 29. I 38.3 38.0 Broad money (M4)/2 0.0 0.0 42.7 35.6 51.1 41.3 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (calendar year; millions of pula) Growth of nominal GDP (annual percentage change) Velocity (GDP relative to M2) Il.652 13.233 15.972 18,951 20.843 23.366 16.0 13.6 , 20.7 18.7 10.0 12.1 4.9 5.5 5.6 5.3 4.6 3.9 14.3 II.0 -14.6 13.1 -19.9 -3.6 -19.4 -3.6 18.1 -3.6 57.8 -36.0 15.6 -0.8 -0.9 20.9 -2.9 -18.4 -9.6 30.0 13.0 2.2 11.3 22.8 . (In millions of pula; end of period) (Twelve-month percentage change) 45.3 15.0 24.3 8.3 2.8 51.3 13.3 22.6 4.8 3.0 IS.8 147.9 20.6 -0.6 3.1 11.8 112.6 24.9 5.3 3.3 1.1 5.6 55.5 31.9 4.0 -25.6 -12.8 334.2 91.8 -2.6 2.7 6.4 46.2 35.9 4.9 8.7 Il.0 41.3 31.9 31.9 -0.2 7.2 28.8 43.6 43.6 78.0 -52.8 21.1 17.9 2.8 18.1 25.0 33.1 25.3 I.8 26.9 18.4 25.6 27. I 4.0 21.4 21.2 31.4 25.8 4.6 (Change in percent ofbeginning-of-year money stock, unless otherwise indicated) 15.2 -13.4 -9.3 -12.3 3.0 -0.2 3.2 . . -4.1 I.8 5.6 1.3 30,036 28.5 4.9 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staNestimates. I/ Defined as M? plus Bank of Botswana Certificates held by the nonhaok sector. 21 Detined as M3 plus Foreign Currency Accounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 5. Botswana: Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Est. Projections Current account balance Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Of which Diamonds Imports, f.o.b Ofwhich Food, beverages, and tobacco Chemical and rubber products Metal and metal products Machinery and electrical equipment Services Transportation Travel Other services Income Compensation of employees Investment income Of which Earnings on reserves Current transfers 494.6 721.5 268.2 503.9 893.0 677.6 604.0 515.7 749.8 895.4 78.1 673.8 613.3 407.8 297.7 181.1 2.217.5 2,819.8 2.0725 2.668.0 2.751.1 2,817.l 2.892.0 2,966.6 1.721.3 2,095.5 l,437.5 2,131.7 2,163.7 2,196.l 2.229. I 2,262.5 -I ,467.7 .1,924.4 -1.994.4 -I ,994.2 -2,137.8 -2,409.3 -2,594.4 -2,785.6 -248.3 -252.6 -253.3 -260.9 -268.7 -276.8 -285.1 -293.7 -149.9 -174.8 -171.2 -173.9 -176.9 - 180.0 -183.2 -186.4 -129.4 -205.4 -194.6 -162.1 -137.7 -117.1 -99.5 -84.6 -236.1 -339.0 -410.1 -395.8 -383.9 -372.4 -361.2 -350.4 - 180.9 -230.5 -171.6 -156.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -139.9 -174.8 -164.9 -162.4 -192.1 -211.9 -237.5 -26 I .8 15.7 43.1 72.4 87.4 103.4 114.0 127.8 140.9 .., -56.7 -98.8 -142.5 -81.1 -96.5 -108.5 -121.3 -134.8 -253.1 -144.8 120.2 -265.9 7.4 -17.4 6.6 25.6 -13.9 -10.5 -15.0 -26.4 -28.6 -30.4 -31.9 -33.3 -239.2 -134.3 135.3 -236.2 36.0 12.9 38.5 38.9 438.0 544.9 528.2 347.9 436.0 412.9 438.5 458.9 178.9 201.4 241.5 252.1 272.4 287.2 299.7 309.1 Capital and financial account Capital account Financial account Direct investment Portfolio investment Other investment Of which Net government long-term borrowing -19.6 51.3 22.2 9.7 8.3 10.1 Other net private long-term borrowing 31.7 -13.4 27.4 21.3 -94.5 -103.4 Short-term borrowing 58.2 71.5 20.1 18.4 18.0 17.7 48.6 22.5 -171.2 -223.4 -239.8 -251.5 -264.6 -276.5 6.2 16.9 32.2 20.6 25.7 25.1 24.4 24.4 42.4 5.6 -203.5 -244.1 -265.5 -276.6 -289. I -300.9 72.2 104.0 92.3 35.2 30.0 33.0 34.0 35.0 -4.5 -33.1 -51.9 -35.0 -45.5 -49.6 -53.1 -55.9 -25.3 -65.2 -244.0 -244.3 -250.0 -260.0 -270.0 -280.0 Net errors and omissions -393.0 -303.6 168.8 8.1 0 0 Reserve assets (increase -) -150.2 -440.4 -265.8 -288.6 -653.2 -426.1 I Memorandum items: Current account (percent of GDP) Trade balance (percent of GDP) End-of-year reserves 21 In months of imports of goods and services Exchange rate 10.4 13.9 5.4 10.0 17.0 I I .9 15.7 17.2 1.6 13.3 11.7 7.1 5.234.5 5.674.9 5,940.7 6,229.2 6,882.5 7,308.6 34.7 28.8 35.7 37.5 38.6 36.4 Dollar-pula (period average) Dollar-pula (end of period ) 0.30 0.27 0.24 0.22 0.20 0.27 0.27 0.24 0.22 0.19 . . Il.3 -111.4 17.3 0 -339.4 10.0 4.9 7,647.9 35.4 11.4 -1 17.9 17.0 0 -239.2 7.9 2.8 7,887.2 34.0 . . . Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Based on pula-denominated estimates converted at period-average exchange rate. 2/ Includes valuation adjustment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 31 - Table 6. Botswana: Central Government Operations, 1996/97-2001/2002 II ,996i?i 1997198 I998199 1999100 Budget Rev (In millions ofpula) Final 2000/o I 2001/02 ESl. Budge1 Toral revenue and grants 7.394.8 8.281.3 7.677.6 10.475 0 13,233.2 11,963.l Total re”c”ue 7311.8 8.169.2 7.539.9 10.308.0 13.1 13.2 11.843.1 Tax revenue x197.4 6,76&l 5.639 5 9.886 4 ll,l51.2 9.943.8 Mmeal revenue 3,640. I 4,681.1 3.186.6 4.836 0 63546.2 6.687.3 Customs Uman receipts 896.2 I, 186. I 1.261.3 I ,973.o 1.929.5 I .93 I .2 General sales tax 248.4 321.9 400 5 438.0 528.7 483.7 Other 413.7 572.3 791.1 755.0 2.146 8 841.6 Nonm rcvcnue 2.113.3 1,401.g 1.900.4 2.306.0 I .962.0 1,899 3 InkreSt 235.4 251.7 208 6 235.0 1862 166.3 Pmpeny ,ncmnc 21 1.740.3 984.2 1.252.9 1,543.o I.23 I .6 I .232.2 Other 137.6 165.9 438 9 527.0 563.5 500.8 Grants 83.0 112.1 137.7 168.0 120.1 120.1 12,961.g 13.557.5 12,926.O I I ,207.O 7,557.3 7.953.0 2,123.g 1.856.0 578.2 947.7 I,M9.6 I .7 19.0 872.2 227.6 891.1 600.3 672. I 35.8 33.4 Total cxpmdirurc and net lending 6092.4 7.406.2 8,957 4 10.876.0 ll,411.9 10.427.5 Cumnt expenditure 4.043 9 4,928.6 6.157.3 7.122.0 7,546 2 7.047.9 Wages and salarics 1.376.7 I ,686.4 2.153 2 2,523.0 2.535.0 2.4 18.7 Interest 91.4 86.2 92.8 101.0 100.6 92.5 Other 2.575.8 3.156.0 4.019.3 4.498.0 4.910.7 4.536.7 Capital cxpcndlturc 2.239.6 2.695.5 2.934 5 3.756.0 3.869.2 3.45 I .o Net lending -191.1 -218.0 -134.0 -2.0 -3.5 -71.4 I I .880.9 14.084.3 8.356.8 9.368.2 2,632.0 109.9 5.614.9 3.584.1 4.709.0 -60.0 -93.2 Prmmy balance (deficir -) 1,393.a 961.4 -1.187.0 -300.0 I,921.9 1.628.2 1.190.9 Overall surplus or dctictl (-) 1.302.4 875 I -1.279.8 -400.0 1.821.3 1.535.7 I .08 I .O -526.8 Financing . I ,302.3 -875.1 I.2793 Foreign (ncl) 85. I 86.2 -20.2 Drawing 230. I 234.4 1460 AmClrtl~tlO” -145.0 -148.2 -166.2 Domestic -I .387.4 -961.3 1.408.0 400.0 -1.821.3 -1.535.7 -1.081.0 626.4 -137.0 -35.2 -35.2 -126.6 28.0 130.1 130.1 47.8 -165.0 -165.3 -165.3 -174.4 537.0 -474 7 -1.500.5 -954.4 (In percent of GDP) Total rwmue and gnnts 37.8 39. I 31.6 38.8 49.1 44.4 42.2 Total rw~nue 37.4 38.6 23.: 367 48 6 43.9 42.1 Tax revenue 26 6 31.9 23.: 36.7 4 I .4 36.9 36.5 Mineral rcvcnuc 18.6 22.1 13 I 17.9 24.3 24.8 24.6 Customs Unmn rccc8pt.i 4.6 5.6 52 7.3 7.2 7.2 6.9 General sales lax I.3 I5 1.6 1.6 2.0 I.8 1.9 Other 2.1 2.7 3.3 2.8 8.0 3.1 3.1 Nomax revenue 10.8 6.6 78 8.6 7.3 7.0 5.6 I"terCSt I.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.7 Property income 8.9 4.6 52 5.7 4.6 4.6 2.9 Other 0.7 0.8 1.8 2.0 2.1 I.9 2.0 GC3lllS 0.4 05 Ob 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.1 40.6 2i.s 56 3.2 2.6 2.0 0.1 Tatal expenditure and net lending 31.2 35.0 36.9 Current enpendlturc 20.7 23.3 25.4 Wages and salaries 7.0 8.0 8.9 Interest 0.5 0.4 0.4 Other 13.2 14.9 16.5 Capital expenditure Il.5 12.7 12.1 Net lending -1.0 -1.0 -0.6 38.7 38.7 42.2 26. I 27.2 28.1 9.0 8.6 0.3 0.4 16.8 18.3 12.8 Il.7 14.1 -0.3 -0.2 -0.3 Primary balance (deficit -) 7.1 4.5 -4.9 Overall surplus or dcficil (-) 6.7 4.1 -5.3 6.0 3.9 5.7 3.5 -1.6 Memorandum item: 40.3 42.3 26.4 28.0 9.4 9.4 0.4 04 167 18.2 13.9 14.3 0.0 0.0 -I I 7.1 -I 5 6.8 I5 -6.8 -0.5 -0 I a.\ a5 -0.6 -0.6 2.0 -1.8 (In milhans ofpula) GDP (fiscal year) -6.7 0.4 1.2 -0.7 -7. I 19.557.0 -4.1 5.3 0.4 -0. I \I 0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -4.5 58 -5.7 -3.5 -1.6 -0.1 -0.4 a.5 0.2 -0.6 -0.6 -5.6 -3.1 21.183.4 24.286.7 26,963.g 26.963.9 26,963 9 30,694.O 33.352.1 Sources: Mmislry of Finance and Development Planning; and Fund staff ertunatcs I/ Fiscal year kginnmg April I. ?/The s~gnilicam dmp in l997/98 was due to changes m the basis on which revenues ilre paid to the govcmment by the Bank of Botswana. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I Botswana: Relations with the Fund (As of December 3 1,2OL10) 1. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Membership Status Joined July 24, 1968; Article VIII General Resources Account Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR (million) 63.00 45.27 17.74 % of Quota 100.0 71.9 28.2 SDR Department Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR (million) 4.36 29.89 % of Allocation 100.0 685.7 Outstanding purchases and loans None. Financial arrangements None. Projected obligations to Fund None. Contribution to Funding of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility In July 1994, Botswana deposited with the Fund, as trustee, an amount equivalent to US$lO million for the benefit of the subsidy account of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). In April 1997, Botswana made a five-year deposit of SDR 14.6 million in the E&W-Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Trust. VIII. Exchange rate arrangement The exchange rate of the Botswana pula is determined on the basis of a basket of currencies. The intervention currency is the U.S. dollar. On December 3 1,2000, the representative rate was US$l = 5.356, and the exchange rate of the South African rand to the pula was R 1 = P 0.71. Ix. Article IV consultation The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on October 6, 1999. The Executive Board took the following decision: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to Botswana’s exchange measure subject to Article VIII, Section 3, in the light of the 1999 Article IV consultation with Botswana conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in SM/99/204, Botswana maintains a multiple currency practice arising from the Foreign Exchange Risk-Sharing Scheme (FERS) applicable to outstanding external loans obtained by certain public enterprises before October 1, 1990, which is subject to Fund Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I approval under Article VIII, Section 3. 3. In view of Botswana’s discontinuance of the FERS scheme in 1990, and of its intention to eliminate the multiple currency practice by 2006, when the last loan under the scheme will mature, the Fund grants approval for the retention by Botswana of the multiple currency practice until August 3 1,200O or the conclusion of the next Article IV consultation with Botswana, whichever is earlier (S&l/99/204, 8/l l/99). X. Technical assistance Resident advisors Department MAE Dates 1989-91 1990-91 1991-95 1995-96 1997 1999-2000 STA 1997 XI. Technical assistance missions Department Dates MAE February 1994 October 1996 February 1997 August 2000 Position Foreign Exchange Reserve Management Advisor Money Market Operations Advisor Deputy Governor at the Bank of Botswana Senior Reserve Management Advisor Central Banking Advisor Banking Supervision Advisor Balance of Payments Advisor Purpose Money market development and monetary management Accounting system of the Bank of Botswana in conjunction with an amendment to the Bank of Botswana Open market operations and other central bank operations Issues in monetary management and financial systems stability and development FAD STA April-May 1994 Broadening of the sales tax base November 1997 Introduction of a value-added-tax (VAT) September 2000 Implementation of VAT next steps August-Sep. 1994 Compilation of balance of payments statistics Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Botswana: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of January 31,200O) 1. Botswana became a member of the World Bank and the International Development Association (IDA) in 1968, and is now a contributor to IDA. There are no active IBRD/IDA projects. in Botswana. The Economic Development Institute (EDI) of the World Bank conducted a regional course on the Southern African Development Community (SADC) in Botswana in 1997. In FY 2000, about 50 participants from Botswana attended World Bank Institute (WBI) courses, and a regional program on Economic Policy in Labor-Surplus Economies was held in the country. 2. Botswana joined the International Finance Corporation (TFC) in 1979 and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1990. The current investment portfolio is small-an equity investment of $0.8 million in a leasing company. 3. Botswana joined MIGA in 1988. No MIGA guarantees for investment in Botswana have been issued to date. Botswana has benefited from a number of MIGA’s technical assistance activities and has participated in several of MIGA’s annual Africa Mining Investment Symposia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX III Botswana: Statistical Issues 1. The core statistical data for surveillance-exchange rate, international reserves, reserve/base money, central bank balance sheet, broad money, interest rate, and consumer price index data-are available on a monthly basis and are reported to the Fund with an acceptable degree of regularity and promptness. Most economic data are made available to the general public through a number of official publications, including the Annual Report and Botswana Financial Statistics of the Bank of Botswana, the Annual Economic Report of the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and the Statistical Bulletin of the Central Statistics Office. The integrity of the data in terms of reliability, quality, and coverage is reasonably satisfactory. However, the time lag in compiling the national accounts, fiscal, and balance of payments data needs to be reduced, and steps taken to generate quarterly accounts. Intensified efforts are needed to develop a unified accounting period for preparing and presenting economic data; the current arrangements-according to which the balance of payments statistics are compiled on a calendar-year basis, and the national accounts and the budget on July-June and April-March bases, respectively-impede the preparation of an integrated set of economic data. Real sector 2. The national accounts data are available on an annual basis only; data are available through 1998/99 (July-June). Annual employment and wage information are available but are rarely reported to STA for publication in the International Financial Statistics (IFS). 3. The consumer price index is comprehensive and provides a breakdown of the index between urban and rural areas, as well as betieen tradables (domestic and imported) and nontradables. In early 1997, the index was rebased from November 1991 to November 1996, and the weights were changed to reflect the findings of the 1993/94 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. Fiscal accounts 4. STA has received monthly government finance statistics (GFS) data up to December 1997. These data have not been published in IFS owing to concerns about their quality. However, the major data problems have now been sorted out, except for unexplained differences between the annual data supplied for the GFS Yearbook (GFSY) and the subannual data for IFS. The Bank of Botswana (the correspondent for IFS) is reviewing with the Ministry of Finance (the ultimate source of GFS data and the correspondent for GFSY) the data, so as to explain/correct the differences, with a view to facilitating their publication. Monetary accounts 5. Monetary data for publication in the IFS are reported on a regular basis, but the timeliness of reporting needs to be improved. Data for the monetary authorities are published usually one month later than data for the deposit money banks. In the February 2001 IFS, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III data for the accounts of the monetary authorities were reported through September 2000, and, for the deposit money banks, through November 2000. External trade and balance of payments 6. Botswana reports data annually on the balance of payments and the international investment position. A resident IMF balance of payments statistics advisor assigned to the Bank of Botswana in October 1997 concluded his term in July 2000. The project helped establish BPMS as the basis for balance of payment statistics, revised the Foreign Investment Survey, established quarterly statistics, and improved estimation methodologies. However, delays in supplying source data are a major concern and hamper efforts to improve the timeliness of statistics. Also, improved cooperation among government agencies is required to improve the data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDate of latest March Dec. observation Dec. 2000 Sep. 2000 Sep. 2000 Sep. 2000 Sep. 2000 Nov. 2000 Nov. 2000 2000 1999 1998199 11 1998199 21 1997 Date received Frequency of data j/ Frequency of reporting 21 Source of data 41 Mode of reporting j/ Confidentiality 61 Frequency of publication 21 Botswana: Core Statistical Indicators (As of February 9,200l) Exchange Rates Foreign Reserves Reserve/ Base Money Central Bank Balance Sheet Broad Money Interest Rates Consumer Price Index Exports/ Imports Current Account Balance Overall Fiscal External Balance GDP/GNP Debt/Debt Service Jan. 2001 Jan. 2001 Jan. 2001 Jan. 2001 Jan. 2001 Jan. 200 1 Dec. .2000 Dec. 2000 March March March March 2000 1999 1999 1999 M M M M M M M M/Q A AfQ A Al0 M A M A M A M M/O A A/O A A (Quarterly (Quarterly reporting reporting irregular) irregular) A Am N A N N C C C C C C C CIWV CIMN C&W CIMN C C C C C C C C C C C C M M M M M M M Q A A A A l/ April-March. 2/ July-June. 31 M = monthly; Q = quarterly; A = annual; and 0 = other. 4/ A = direct report by the authorities; and N = official publication. I/ C = cable or facsimile; M = mail; and V = staff visits. 61 C = unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Botswana: Social and Demographic Indicators Area (square kilometers) Population (1997/98 estimate) Total (million) Growth rate (percent a year, 1993/94-97/98 average) Density (per. sq. km.) GDP per capita (U.S. dollars, 1997/98 estimate I/ 581,730 1.57 2.5 2.7 3,434 Health Physician per 10,000 population (1993) Access to safe water ( 1993/94) l! Percentage of population Total Urban Rural 1.9 83.2 100.0 76.1 Population characteristics Education Life expectancy at birth (years, 1998) 2/ 40.0 School enrollment (1994) Birth rate per 1,000 people (1996) 33.4 (in percent, net ) HIV/AIDS prevalency rate 35 Labor force (1996, million) 0.65 Female (in percent of total) 45.6 Primary education 96 Secondary education 45 Adult literacy rate (1995) 70 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators. l/ Botswana authorities. National accounts year beginning July 1. 2/ U.S census bureau. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicc - 39 - APPENDIX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. /.. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Botswana On March 12, 2001, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Botswana.’ Background Abundant diamond resources coupled with sound macroeconomic policies, have enabled Botswana to achieve one of the highest growth rates in the world: over the past 30 years, real per capita GDP growth averaged more than 7 percent a year, allowing Botswana to move from one of the poorest countries in the world to position as a middle-income country today. Botswana remains heavily dependent on its diamond sector: it accounts for more than one-third of GDP and 70 percent of export earnings. Real GDP growth increased to an estimated 7% percent in 1999/2000 (July-June) largely reflecting a rebound in the global diamond market. Other sectors of the economy also performed well, in part as a product of Botswana’s market-friendly environment, sound macroeconomic policies, and investments in education and physical infrastructure. Consumer price inflation (12-month basis) accelerated in 2000 to 8% percent by year’s end. Botswana’s rate of inflation continued to mirror broadly core inflation in South Africa. This follows from the close trade ties between the two countries and Botswana’s exchange rate, which is pegged to the rand and the SDR. Buoyant demand in Botswana’s construction sector added to inflationary pressures. The overall fiscal balance returned to a surplus in 1999/2000 (April-March), from an unexpected deficit the year before. The significant improvement in the budgetary outcome * Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- APPENDIX V , mostly reflected the sharp rise in diamond revenue. Spending growth was brought down from a very high rate of increase the year before, when civil servant salaries were raised by 25 percent and development spending increased sharply. Monetary developments in 2000 were characterized by a slowing of credit growth to the private sector, but from excessive rates of increase in 1998-99. The Bank of Botswana used open market operations-the sale of Bank of Botswana Certificates-to raise interest rates and tighten credit conditions. The pula was generally stable in effective terms, owing Botswana’s pegged exchange rate system. However, the pula depreciated by about 6 percent and 14 percent against the euro and U.S. dollar respectively, while appreciating by some 6 percent against the rand. The external current account was in surplus by an estimated [13] percent of GDP in 2000. This surplus was largely attributable to the performance of the diamond industry. Imports remained strong, reflecting domestic demand developments. Gross international reserves rose to an estimated $6.3 billion at end-2000, equivalent to 36 months of imports of goods and services. Botswana, as a member of the Southern African Customs Union, is seeing its external tariffs decline. Executive Board Assessment Public Information Notices (PINS) are issued (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public41 - APPENDIX V Botswana: Selected Economic Indicators 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Output and prices (change in percent)l/ Real GDP l/ Consumer prices (annual average) 3.2 5.5 5.6 8.1 4.1 7.7 7.8 10.6 10.6 10.1 9.0 6.4 7.4 8.6 Investment and savings (percent of GDP)l/ Gross investment Public Private Gross national savings Public Private 25.7 23.7 26.0 30.0 36.8 26.6 29.3 11.2 11.8 12.6 13.4 15.5 11.6 12.0 14.4 12.0 13.3 16.7 21.3 15.0 17.3 44.6 50.5 16.7 10.0 18.5 18.5 12.8 17.4 21.8 7.9 4.8 -6.3 -5.1 5.1 27.2 28.6 8.8 5.2 24.8 23.7 7.2 Central government finance (percent of GDP) I2 Total revenue and grants Total Expenditure and net lending Overall balance (excluding grants) Overall balance (including grants) Primary balance (including grants) Total public debt outstanding 32.6 32.4 37.8 39.1 31.6 44.4 32.1 32.2 37.4 38.6 23.2 43.9 0.9 I.4 6.2 3.6 -5.8 5.2 I.4 I.6 6.7 4.1 -5.3 5.7 2.0 2.1 7.1 4.5 -4.9 6.0 15.0 13.0 11.0 10.0 10.0 10.0 42.2 42. I 3.4 3.5 3.9 . . . Money and credit Money and quasi money (end year; percent change) 13.0 2.2 18.1 25.0 33.7 18.4 12.9 Bank of Botswana lending rate 13.5 13.0 13.0 12.5 12.5 13.3 14.3 External sector (millions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance Current account balance Gross official reserves (end of period) 510 555 750 895 78 674 613 212 300 495 721 268 504 893 4,40 I 4,695 5,234 5,675 5,941 6,229 6,927 Exchange rates Botswana pulas per U.S. dollar (period average) 2.7 2.8 3.3 3.7 4.2 4.6 5.4 Real effective exchange rate (percent change) -1.0 -3.5 -1.6 -2.4 0.8 1.0 0.0 Sources: Botswana authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections I! National accounts year beginning July I, 2/ Fiscal year beginning April I, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public