DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUN-D AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR - El AGENDA SM/O1/87 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION March 9,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Oman-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 200 1 Article IV consultation with Oman, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, March 26,200 1. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Oman indicating whether or not they consent the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Fasano (ext. 36972). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, March 19,200 1. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND OMAN Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2001 Consultation with Oman Approved by P. Chabrier and J. Seade March 8,200l l The 2001 Article IV consultation discussions with Oman were held in Muscat during October 16-30,200O and January 2%February 5,200l. l The staff team consisted of Messrs. Fasano (Head), Wilson, Alabdulrazzaq, Ms. Farhan, and Mr. Guerami (all MED). Mr. Chabrier participated in the policy discussions. l The Omani representatives included the Minister of Commerce and Industry; the Executive President of the Central Bank; the Undersecretaries and Directors of the Ministry of Finance, National Economy, Oil and Gas, and other ministries; as well as representatives from the Capital Market Authority, the Omani Center for Investment Promotion and Export Development, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, brokerage firms, commercial banks, and public enterprises. l In concluding the last consultation with Oman on June 30, 1999, Directors urged the authorities to pursue vigorously their ongoing efforts to develop a broad-based adjustment and reform strategy. They saw the priorities as broadening the revenue base and further restructuring expenditures through streamlining the civil service and improving the overall efficiency of public services. Directors also encouraged the authorities to expand the role of the private sector, mainly by accelerating the privatization process, while stressing the need to apply flexibly the quota system for the employment of nationals to avoid discouraging new investment. l Oman accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 and the proposed fourth amendment of the Articles of Agreement. l The principal author of this report is Mr. Fasano. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents - Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Background and Developments during 1999 and 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Discussions on Prospects and Policy Issues ......................................................................... 9 A. Outlook and Policies for 2001 and the Medium Term ........................................... 10 B. Structural Reforms and the Labor Market .............................................................. 22 C. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... 27 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 Text Boxes 1. State General Reserve Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 2. Key Economic Reforms Recently Adopted or Underway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Text Tables 1. Basic Economic Indicators, 1996-200 1 ......................................................................... 30 2. Government Finances, 1996-200 1 ................................................................................. 31 3. Balance of Payments, 1996-200 1 .................................................................................. 32 4. Monetary Survey, 1996-200 1 ........................................................................................ 33 5. Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-200 1 .............................................................................. 34 6. Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2006 ............. 35 Figures 1 Oman and Other GCC Countries: Real GDP Growth, 1991-99 ...................................... 6 2. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Non-oil Fiscal Deficit, 1991-99 ................................ 7 3. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Non-oil Real GDP Growth, 1991-2006 .................. 11 4. Fiscal Balances, 1990-2006 ........................................................................................... 13 5. Government Revenue and Expenditure, 1990-2006 ...................................................... 16 6. External Current Account Balance, 1990-2006 ............................................................. 19 7. Total External Debt, 1990-2006 .................................................................................... 20 8. Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-December 2000 ............................................... .23 9. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Average Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1990-2000 ....................................................................................... 24 Appendices I. Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................... 36 II. The Omani Banking System ........................................................................................... 37 III. Fund Relations ................................................................................................................ 47 IV. Relations with the World Bank Group .......................................................................... .49 V. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................. 50 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary - Current Setting l The strong recovery in world oil prices since mid- 1999 together with prudent fiscal and monetary policies has led to a significant improvement in Oman’s financial position. Both the fiscal and external account deficits turned into large surpluses in 2000. Although real GDP fell in 1999 hit by lower private consumption and investment, it recovered-amid low inflation-in the following year, underpinned by rising infrastructure investment and higher export volumes. l The authorities stepped up structural reforms to promote growth and employment. A comprehensive divestment program for the power sector is underway on a fast track, while the public telecommunications company is currently finalizing its search for a foreign strategic partner. Following the regional trend, they have also adopted new incentives to attract foreign investment, as well as other important structural reforms (Box 2). l Notwithstanding the expected decline in world oil prices over the medium term, Oman’s growth outlook remains favorable, reflecting rising liquefied natural gas exports and an ambitious investment program in gas-based industries and tourism. However, the country’s financial situation is likely to weaken in the coming years without sustained efforts at fiscal consolidation. Staff Appraisal l The authorities responded to the windfall oil gains of 1999 and 2000 by repaying short-term debt and building up sizeable official foreign assets, despite larger-than- budgeted expenditure, particularly defense in 2000. l Oman’s greatest challenges remain the diversification of the economy and job creation for a rapidly rising local labor force. In order to address these challenges, the authorities have moved resolutely on economic reforms, particularly privatization and the creation of a level playing field between local and foreign companies. To support these reforms, fiscal discipline should be maintained, while mobilizing non-oil revenue and rationalizing expenditure. With the Fund’s technical assistance, authorities have continued working towards bringing prudential regulations and bank supervision to the highest internationally accepted standards, as well as adopting indirect monetary instruments. Efforts are also underway to improve corporate governance. l The authorities have improved significantly Oman’s statistics, but comprehensive data on the country’s total external debt and labor statistics, as well as a consolidated picture of the public finances, should be published to enhance transparency further. They have decided to carry out a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and to participate in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUNDANDDEVELOPMENTSDUFUNG 1999 AND 2000 1. Within a framework of a liberal trade and exchange system, Oman has continued to use its relatively limited oil resources for rapid social development and economic growth in the 1990s.’ 2 Amid low inflation, real GDP grew, on average, by 5 percent a year-against a 3.5 percent average growth rate in other Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries (Figure 1).3 This growth was spurred by rising oil output and services, in particular, wholesale and retail trade and by two large export-oriented projects- the liquefied natural gas (LNG) and the Salalah container port terminal; both projects were the cornerstone of the diversification drive in the past few years. The overall fiscal and external current account deficits averaged less than 2 percent of GDP a year, while the non- oil fiscal deficit declined steadily during the 199Os, as total expenditure remained stable at about RO 2.2 billion a year and fees and charges were increased (Figure 2).4 Also, the country’s total external debt has remained manageable, as the authorities have relied on the State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) to finance fiscal and external imbalances. Nonetheless, although oil contributed to some 37 percent of GDP in 1998-99, it still accounted for about 70 percent of fiscal and export receipts--one of the highest oil dependency rate among GCC countries-with Oman, therefore, remaining highly vulnerable to oil price fluctuations. Developments in 1999 2. Following a major financial setback in 1998 owing to the collapse in oil prices, Oman’s financial imbalances improved sharply in 1999, reflecting the strong recovery in oil prices and restrained expenditure growth. The overall fiscal balance shifted from a deficit of almost 6 percent of GDP in 1998 to a surplus of about 1 percent in 1999, while expenditure, including net lending, increased by less than 3 percent (Tables 1 and 2).5 Also, custom duty revenue increased owing to the (temporary) hike in tariffs earlier in the year from 5 percent to 15 percent on most goods. Thus, the non-oil fiscal deficit reached the ’ See Appendix I for social indicators. 2 At current production levels, oil-proven reserves are expected to last for less than 20 years, and gas reserves for about 45 years. 3 The member countries of the GCC are Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. 4 Due to the volatility in oil and gas prices, the non-oil fiscal balance-defined as the overall fiscal balance excluding oil and gas revenue-is a more useful indicator of underlying fiscal trends than the overall fiscal balance. 5 To present a more accurate picture of Oman’s public finance, the staffs definition of the overall fiscal balance includes oil transfers to the SGRF and Oil Fund, which are excluded from official government statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- lowest level in over a decade (about 27 percent of GDP). The external current account deficit improved as well, narrowing from 23 percent of GDP to some 3 percent over the same period, with lower imports of both consumer and capital goods also contributing to this improvement (Tables 1 and 3). Meanwhile, real GDP declined by 1 percent in 1999, as a result of the completion of the LNG and Salalah port projects and lower private consumption spending hit by tighter personal credit conditions. 3. The government used the fiscal surplus to repay short-term external and local debt incurred in 1998. As a result, official foreign assets-including those of the SGRP and Central Bank of Oman (CBO)-increased by only US$lOO million to US$4.2 billion by the end of 1999. However, their composition changed: CBO’s reserves rose by US$830 million to US$2.8 billion-equivalent to about 7 months of imports of goods and services and 1.4 times Oman’s short-term total external debt (on a remaining maturity basis)-while SGRP foreign resources declined by almost the same amount on account of a precautionary rise in SGRP deposits with the CBO in early 1999, in view of the authorities’ expectation of weak oil prices throughout the year (Table 1). 4. Faced with prospects of low oil prices and a deteriorating current account, personal credit policy was tightened significantly in early 1999. The CBO limited personal loans-the largest lending category-to 30 percent of private sector credit, and temporarily removed the ceiling on the interest rate for such loans to reduce, in particular, import growth.6 As a result, the pace of growth of total private sector credit was halved to about 9 percent from end-1998 to end-1999. Moreover, net credit to the government fell sharply, following the repayment of debt owed to the CBO and the increase in SGW deposits with the CBO, with broad money growing by some 6 percent (Tables 1 and 4).7 6 The authorities re-introduced the interest rate ceiling in late 1999 in reaction to the sharp increase in this rate (to about 18 percent) that, according to the authorities, reflected collusion among the largest banks rather than liquidity conditions. 7 The central government can receive short-term financing from the CBO for up to 10 percent of the year’s budgeted revenue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public10 8 6 Figure 1. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Real GDP Growth, 1991-99 (In percent) \ \ \ \ / \ I I - - - w - - * \ II I - - Other GCC Countries 11 1 I I 1 I I I I 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 b Sources: National authorities. l/ Weighted average growth rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 Figure 2. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Non-oil Fiscal Deficit, 1991-99 (In percent of GDP) h ’ \ c I 1 Other GCC Countries / \ I \ I \ \ \ \ \ \ I , I I I # I I 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 I 4 I Sources: National authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 5. Despite the decline in bank profits in 1999, high capitalization and strengthened prudential oversight helped preserve the quality of assets and the soundness of the banking system. Following two years of rapid growth, bank profits fell by 15 percent in 1999, reflecting new regulations that sharply increased provision for unrealized losses in stock investments (following the 1998 collapse of the stock market) and to the end of the tax holiday-period granted to some banks to encourage their mergers. ’ Nonetheless, the return on assets remained close to 2 percent, and the capital adequacy ratio above the 12 percent stipulated by the CBO, while nonperforming loans stood at only 6 percent of total loans and were well-provisioned.’ On other developments, the financial system was further strengthened with the adoption, in line with best international practices, of a law separating trade, regulatory, and depository functions of the MSM, which rose by almost 10 percent in 1999. Developments in 2000 6. In 2000, the oil windfall gain led to a sizeable build-up of official foreign assets in spite of a larger-than-budgeted increase in government spending. After almost a decade of stable expenditures, these increased by about 19 percent in 2000 over actual 1999 figures (or 34 percent of the rise in total revenue), reflecting higher spending in most categories, particularly defense and capital outlays, while non-oil revenue declined because the authorities reversed the increase in customs duties adopted in the previous year to contain the deterioration in the fiscal position as a result of the sharp downturn in world oil prices in 1998 and early 1999.” The loosening of fiscal policy led to a significant deterioration in the non-oil fiscal deficit, which rose by about 30 percent in nominal terms to 28 percent of GDP. But with government revenue from oil increasing by 68 percent, the overall fiscal balance reached an estimated surplus of about 12 percent of GDP (Table 2). Higher oil prices together with the coming on stream of LNG exports resulted in an external current account surplus of 13.5 percent of GDP (Table 3). These high surpluses-not seen since the 198 1 oil boom-contributed to a substantial build-up in total official foreign assets, which rose by 49 percent to US$6.2 billion (equivalent to 3 1 percent of GDP) by the end of the year. In ’ The Muscat Stock Market (MSM) quintupled from its establishment in the late 1980s through 1997 before declining by 52 percent in 1998. Part of this increase in recent years was accounted for by rapid personal credit growth. 9 See Appendix II for further details on the Omani banking system. lo The import tariff currently has several rates: 0 percent (essential goods), 5 percent (applicable to over 70 percent of imports), 15-25 percent for a few products with local substitutes, and 100 percent for tobacco and alcoholic beverages. The GCC-agreed common external tariff-to become effective no later than March 2005-stipulates three rates: 0 percent on essential goods, 5.5 percent on basic goods, and 7.5 percent on other goods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- addition, Oman became a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in November 2000. l1 7. On the monetary front, the authorities maintained tight personal credit conditions in 2000. This resulted in a moderate broad money growth (about 6 percent), while, in view of the sharp increase in oil revenue, the authorities reversed the accumulation of SGRF deposits with the CBO observed in the previous year leading to lower CBO reserves. Regarding economic growth-amid low inflation reflecting lower import prices- real GDP recovered in 2000, growing by almost 5 percent, underpinned by rising infrastructure investment (gas pipelines, industrial port of Sohar, and the power sector) and higher volumes of all export categories, while private consumption growth was slightly negative, hindering a faster recovery in non-oil real GDP. 8. Despite the sharp improvement in macroeconomic performance, Oman’s stock market fell by 20 percent by end-200~in line with most other markets in the region. This decline took place even though the market staged a moderate rally in November 2000 abler the government-adopted measures to boost market confidence. These measures included a new US$130 million government stock fund (financed by SGRF resources), incentives for mergers in the brokerage sector, and the bailout of small investors-shared with banks and brokerage firms-at a cost of about US$62 million. Notwithstanding these initiatives, the downward trend in stock prices has continued into early 2001, owing to both lower net bank profits (after taxes and loan loss provisions)-financial institutions represent about 60 percent of the stock index-and disappointing corporate earnings, reflecting low non-oil growth over the past two years. II. DISCUSSIONS ON PROSPECTS AND POLICY ISSUES 9. Because of Oman’s rapid population growth and relatively limited oil resources, the authorities’ greatest challenges remain the diversification of the economy and job creation.12 To address these challenges, the authorities should focus on: (a) supporting the development of sectors in which Oman has a comparative advantage, such as gas-based industries and tourism; (b) creating a business-friendly environment to encourage local and foreign investment; (c) deepening the financial sector; (d) rationalizing expenditures to help restructure government expenditure toward social, training, and education outlays to satisfy the demand of a rising young population; and (e) broadening the non-oil revenue base to enhance fiscal resiliency. The staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts in all these areas, as reflected in the objectives outlined in the Sixth Five-Year Development Plan (2001-05). In this context, the discussions focused on: (a) prospects for 2001 and outlook and policies for i1 Presently, only Saudi Arabia, among GCC countries, has yet to join the WTO. l2 The local labor force has grown annually at about 5 percent over the past few years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- the medium term, (b) the progress made in advancing structural reforms and expanding job opportunities for nationals, and (c) statistical issues. A. Outlook and Policies for 2001 and the Medium Term 10. Although world crude oil prices are expected to fall to about US$19 per barrel over the medium term, Oman’s growth prospects would remain highly favorable in the period ahead.13 This reflects rising LNG exports and investments in export-oriented, gas- based industries and services, such as tourism. In fact, LNG exports will double in 2001 to 5.3 million tons (US$l billion) and are expected to reach almost 10 million tons by 2004 as a result of long-term contracts already signed with Korea, Japan, and India, and others currently under negotiation. In addition, a pool of projects in various stages-promoted largely through joint ventures and estimated at over US$6 billion, almost one-third of the current GDP-is underway. Also, most indicators of vulnerability are expected to improve further in the near term (Table 5). However, Oman’s financial situation is likely to weaken in the coming years without sustained efforts at fiscal consolidation. Development strategy and growth 11. The growth strategy has shifted towards creating the infrastructure for, and promoting foreign investment in, gas-based industries-such as aluminum smelter, petrochemicals, and fertilizers. In addition, the development of downstream activities associated with these new industries-together with that of tourism, mining, and flsheries- would play an important role in the coming years to support the diversification drive and, in particular, to create job opportunities for Omani nationals. The authorities also intend to step up oil and gas exploration to boost the country’s proven reserves. The staff fully endorsed the broad objectives of this development strategy. 12. Real GDP is expected to grow by 6.5 percent in 2001 spurred by the expansion of LNG output, before slowing, on average, to 4.5 percent a year from 2002 to 2006 (Table 6). Oil (and gas) GDP growth will probably decelerate in the coming years as LNG output growth levels off after 2004, while oil activity will remain constrained by the authorities’ prudent strategy that seeks to prevent a full exhaustion of oil reserves by replacing production with new reserves. In contrast, non-oil real growth could exceed 5 percent a year-growing above the expected regional average-over the projected period, mainly reflecting investments in the power sector, infrastructure, and new projects in the industrial and service sectors (Figure 3). As a result, investment is expected to peak at 24 percent of GDP by 2003 from 13 percent in 2000, before declining to 17 percent by 2006 (Tables 5 and 6). i3 The projected growth rates of world crude oil prices over the medium term are based on the February 15,200l World Economic Outlook (WEO) projection. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 3. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Non-oil Real GDP Growth, 1991-2006 (In percent) 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 I c CL Sources: National authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Weighted average growth rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Public finances 13. Fiscal policy would remain slightly expansionary in 2001. The budget-awn up on the basis of an oil price assumption of US$l8 per barrel+envisages no new non-oil revenue measures, while projecting a 3.5 percent increase in expenditure relative to the estimated spending level of 2000, with military outlays increasing by 12 percent following a recent defense pact signed among the GCC countries. l4 Thus, the non-oil fiscal deficit is expected to increase from 28 percent of GDP in 1999 to almost 30 percent in 2000. However, this did not seem to represent a trend toward increasing non-oil deficits as a percent of GDP. In fact, the authorities pointed out that defense spending would be cut by about 15 percent between 2002 and 2005 (equivalent to almost 2 percent of GDP), while the growth of other expenditure would be limited, as projected in the Sixth Five-Year Development Plan. Also, when based on more up-to-date oil export price estimates (US$24.1 per barrel on average in the year) are used, the staff projected that the overall fiscal surplus would be equivalent to 10.5 percent of GDP in 2001 (Table 2). The authorities indicated that any windfall gain from oil resulting from higher-than-budgeted oil prices would be used mainly to boost government foreign assets. 14. Despite the expected cuts in defense, Oman’s fiscal position could weaken over the medium term owing to projected lower oil prices. Under current policies, the fiscal surplus would decline rapidly, reaching about 2 percent of GDP by 2006. If average world crude oil prices were to decline more than predicted, for instance, to US$l6 per barrel beginning in 2002, the overall fiscal balance would shift to a deficit of over 3 percent of GDP, with SGRF assets being almost depleted to finance these imbalances and repay scheduled debt amortization. Thus, the overall fiscal position would remain vulnerable to oil price fluctuations, with crude oil revenue accounting for about 70 percent of government revenue through 2006 despite the expected increase in LNG earnings (Table 6, Figure 4).15 l4 In 200 1, the authorities are considering a supplementary budget that would increase expenditure by up to RO 153 million, about 6 percent higher than originally budgeted. The staff incorporated the impact of this supplementary spending in their 2001 projections. l5 The upstream portion of the LNG project would provide revenue from the sale of condensates in the period ahead. In contrast, the downstream portion of the LNG project will not impact the budget, with the exception of possible dividend income, until the end of the current decade because of a lo-year tax holiday granted to the project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 4. Oman: Fiscal Balances, 1990-2006 (In percent of GDP) 15 10 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 -35 Overall Fiscal Balance l/ 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Projections . ------------ 31 ‘* _ - - - - ---.__ Non-oil Current Balance 2/ * *. __ _ - - - ----- _.____._. -.--..-- 31 Sources: Omani authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes transfers to the State General Reserve and oil Funds, and investment income. 2/ Non-oil revenue minus current expenditure, including an estimate for the depreciation of government capital stock. 3/ Average oil price assumed to be US$16 per barrel during 2002-06, as compared to USS19.2 per barrel in the baseline scenario. 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 -35 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 15. The strengthening of the fiscal position is paramount to preclude a sharp deterioration in the external current account at a time when the authorities seek to attract foreign investment. To this end, despite overall fiscal surpluses, the non-oil current fiscal deficit-defined as non-oil revenue, including the income from government assets, minus current expenditure, including the estimated depreciation of government capital stock-should be more in line with the long-term income of Oman’s oil and gas wealth (or Oman’s permanent income), ensuring intergenerational economic equity. This would require a fiscal adjustment equivalent to about 5 percent of GDP, under the reasonable assumptions of maintaining the country’s oil and gas wealth constant in real terms over time, and a long- run world crude oil price of US$16 per barrel (Figure 4).16 16. This fiscal adjustment could be achieved through non-oil revenue enhancing measures and efforts at restraining expenditure growth. These measures could include extending excises to selected services, eliminating customs duty exemptions and tax holidays, increasing charges for the use of subsidized electricity and water, and adopting a broad-based general sales tax in coordination with other GCC countries, in view of their open borders.17 In this context, the staff welcomed the recent adoption of a low tax on tourism services (4 percent), and the improvement in the collection of custom duties and some fees, as well as the efforts underway to streamline the corporate tax code.18 On the expenditure front, the authorities indicated that they intended to restrain the growth of government spending by privatizing public enterprises, outsourcing services to the private sector, and merging ministries and other public entities, including the nine public pension funds into two, as well as reducing defense spending and further improving the cost effectiveness of l6 The permanent income is estimated at about RO 1.5 billion a year over the next decade; this compares to a projected non-oil current fiscal deficit of some RO 1.9 billion over the medium term. However, the permanent income estimate is, in particular, very sensitive to the long-run oil price assumption (if oil prices were US$l8 per barrel, the permanent income would reach RO 1.7 billion, implying instead, a fiscal adjustment equivalent to almost 3 percent of GDP). Thus, given high oil price uncertainty and adjustment costs, precautionary savings should be made by achieving a current non-oil fiscal deficit lower than the level indicated by the permanent income. l7 The adoption of a low general sales tax levied at the manufacturing/import level, as well as the elimination of customs duty exemptions, could produce close to 2 percent of GDP. l8 These measures include the consolidation of municipality fees for commercial registration licenses, the adoption of a one-stop payment for the vocational training fee, and, regarding custom duties collection, the harmonization of imported commodity codes, outsourcing of cargo handling to private contractors, and informatization of customs procedures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- services provided by the government. l9 The staff agreed with these measures, which will also enhance private sector development. The adjustment effort could be also supported by restraint in the wage bill, substitution of targeted transfers for price subsidies, and, as the public debt declines, saving on interest payments. In addition, the staff underscored the importance of adhering to the expenditure limits within the annual budget instead of resorting to supplementary budgets-as has been the practice in the past years-other than under exceptional circumstances (Figure 5). 17. The staff also discussed with the authorities policies to enhance the effectiveness of the SGRF. Although this fund has served, de facto, as a stabilization fund, the staff emphasized the importance of also recognizing the SGRF as the savings fund for the future generations. In this context, it proposed to save SGRF resources by mandating budget financing to be covered mainly through issuance of government securities without automatic recourse to these resources. The fund would buy these securities-fulfilling, therefore, stabilization objectives-as part of a balanced portfolio investment, with all interest payments and obligations to the SGRF fully accounted for in the budget. Such a separation together with the disclosure of the fund’s operations to the public would enforce better budgetary discipline and enhance fiscal transparency. The authorities recognized the importance of preserving SGRF resources for the future generations. Thus, they indicated that SGRF resources are now invested in long- and short-term assets, and that they intend to use only those resources invested in short-term assets if the need for budget financing arises (Box 1). l9 The government carried out in April 2000, with assistance from the World Bank, a study on the cost effectiveness of the health sector, which showed high efficiency in these services. A study on education was recently undertaken. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- I I I I I I I I : I I I I \ / / /I / / : I I \ \ \ \ / \ \ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 1. State General Reserve Fund The SGRF-created in 1980 as a saving fund-aims at accumulating financial resources to replace over time dwindling oil revenues over time and ensure intergenerational economic equity.” However, it has been mainly a stabilization fLnd, with its resources frequently used for budget financing, particularly during the 1990s when they declined from a peak of US$4.3 billion at the end of 1992 to about US$2 billion at the end of 1999. An independent government agency manages the SGRF assets. Most of these assets are invested abroad, but a small portion is held in foreign currency deposits with the CBO and local commercial banks, and in recent years, invested in the local stock market. The SGRF’s deposit rules have been modified on several occasions. The fund was initially allocated 15 percent of total oil receipts; then, beginning in 1986, this allocation was reduced to 5 percent. During much of the 199Os, revenue from oil prices over US$l5 per barrel and below US$l7 per barrel were accumulated in the SGRF. Since 1998, the general rule has been to transfer to the fund any dollar amount above the budgeted oil price?’ However, the amount saved could be substantially lower. Indeed, the government can withdraw resources from the fund up to the budgeted fiscal deficit during a given year. But, if the actual deficit turns out to be higher-than-projected in the budget, the government can finance it through higher withdrawals from the SGRF. Thus, in practice, the accumulation of resources into the fund becomes a residual, depending on fiscal developments during the year, dwindling its investment base and income growth. External sector 18. Rising capital goods imports associated with ongoing and expected investments in export-oriented activities, together with lower oil and gas prices, would weaken Oman’s external position temporarily in the period ahead. In spite of increasing LNG export volume the current account balance would deteriorate from a projected surplus of 8 percent of GDP in 2001 to a deficit that would peak at about 6 percent of GDP by 2003. It would then shiff back to a small surplus by the end of the projected period as the investment program is completed and new non-oil exports come onstream (Tables 3 and 6; Figure 6). Oman’s total external debt-at about US$7 billion or 34 percent of GDP in 2000-would remain manageable over the medium term, peaking at almost 40 percent of GDP by 2003, before declining through 2006 as the expected increase in nongovemment external borrowing 2o For a further analysis on oil funds, see Fasano, U., 2000, “Review of the Experience with Oil Stabilization and Savings Funds in Selected Countries”, IMF Working Paper, WP/OO/112. 21 In 1993, Oman created the Oil Fund to finance investments in the hydrocarbon sector locally and abroad. The deposit rule-since 1996-has been to transfer to the fund the equivalent of 15,000 barrels a day valued at market price. At the end of 2000, the Oil Fund’s assets stood at RO 289 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- would be offset by the repayment of government and LNG debts over the same period (Figure 7). 19. The projected increase in external borrowing would preclude a decline in CBO international reserves despite the expected deterioration in the current account. These reserves would continue to provide between 4-5 months of import cover and remain above the level of total short-term external debt (on a remaining maturity basis) over the medium term. Nevertheless, if the price of oil declines to US$l6 per barrel beginning in 2002, the external current account would remain in a deficit throughout the projected period, reaching 2 percent of GDP by 2006 (Figure 6). In this context, the staff urged the authorities to exercise prudence on foreign borrowing and rely more on foreign direct investment and equity participation to finance program investments. Financial policies 20. To support the authorities’ development strategy and help mobilize resources, financial intermediation should be deepened. To this end, barring exceptional circumstances, the authorities should consider abolishing both the interest rate and quantitative ceilings on personal loans simultaneously to foster competition among banks, as well as promote a more efficient allocation of resources.22 The staff suggested that, in parallel with the liberalization of personal credit, the authorities consider tightening credit standards for personal loans, by, for instance, encouraging banks to develop a modern credit asset analysis infrastructure. It also recommended that the authorities review the current regulations governing the public pension funds’ asset allocation to allow long-term deposits with local banks in response to their recent issuances of long-term CDs. 22 This simultaneous liberalization should address what the authorities saw as a collusive behavior among the largest banks, since interest rates on personal loans were bound to increase sharply, given the high demand for these loans and the imposition of a quantitative ceiling. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-15 -20 -25 Figure 6. Oman: External Current Account Balance, 1990-2006 (In percent of GDP) I I I I I I , I I I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Omani authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Projections \ \ \ \ \ G \ / \ / \ / / \ / \ L J’ -- 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 l/ Average oil price assumed to be US$16 per barrel during 2002-06, against US$19.2 in the baseline scenario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 7. Oman: Total External Debt, 1990-2006 (In percent of GDP) 50 25 Projections 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 21. The authorities indicated that the ceilings on personallending would be maintained for the time being to boost corporate lending, as well as to control private sector demand. The staff pointed out that banks should decide their asset allocation based on market conditions rather than regulations. Indeed, given Oman’s young population, loan demand from the retail sector is likely to continue to be strong over the medium term, while corporate lending might pick up under the current investment program.23 Thus, the staff welcomed the recent steps to ease personal credit regulations by eliminating the interest rate ceiling on credit card purchases and allowing banks to lend a higher portion of their portfolio (now up to 35 percent of their total lending) to accommodate existing demand. Regarding demand management, this objective could be achieved by relying more on indirect monetary instruments. In fact, the authorities have already introduced repo facilities and an interbank market with government securities as 100 percent collateral. They have also indicated that CBO short-term CDs would be issued shortly. In addition, the authorities plan to create a monetary policy unit at the CBO to forecast liquidity needs and introduce reverse repo facilities-the Fund’s technical assistance in this area has already been requested. The staff welcomed all these measures to enhance the role of monetary policy. 22. Important efforts are underway to improve corporate governance. These include increasing both the accountability of the board of directors and transparency-quarterly reports are now required--of the companies listed in the MSM, as well as strictly enforcing current regulations. These efforts should also support a recovery in the market in the period ahead. The authorities also pointed out that market fundamentals were improving, as equity prices were currently more appropriately valued and confidence was enhanced by ongoing structural reforms and investments.24 The staff agreed with this assessment, but cautioned the authorities against the potential moral hazard that some of the measures adopted last November-in particular the bailout of small investors-might create, even though the authorities stressed that these measures were exceptional (see paragraph 8). On other financial issues, the CBO conducted a self-assessment of its supervisory system and practices in 2000. Overall, the survey indicated that it was in compliance with the Base1 Core Principles (Appendix II). In addition, the authorities confirmed their decision to carry out a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). 23. The authorities pointed out that the exchange rate peg has served Oman well by providing a nominal anchor. In particular, non-oil export volumes of Omani origin and re- exports have been expanding rapidly in the 1990s-over 15 percent a year on average- 23 There is no clear evidence that corporate lending was being crowded out in the past because of rapid personal credit growth. In fact, credit to the manufacturing sector has been growing on average much faster than credit for personal loans over the past five years- albeit from a lower base. 24 The average price-to-earnings ratio in the MSM declined from 16.6 at end-1999 to about 10 at end-2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - currently accounting for 24 percent of total exports, the largest share among GCC countries.25 Also, reflecting Oman’s relatively low inflation and the movements of the U.S. dollar in the international market, the real effective exchange rate has remained, on average, stable over the past decade, resulting in the most competitive rate in the region (Figures 8 and 9).26 The staff shared the authorities’ view and highlighted that fiscal discipline and a sound banking system are crucial elements to support the current exchange rate peg, particularly under high capital mobility. It also stressed that the establishment of a mechanism for duty drawback on imported inputs could boost the country’s non-oil exports. B. Structural Reforms and the Labor Market 24. The sharp increase in oil revenue in recent years has not diminished the authorities’ commitment to economic reforms, particularly privatization. A comprehensive divestment program for the power sector-the most sweeping of its kind in the Gulf area-is underway on a fast track, with the authorities planning to gradually increase electricity tariffs to reflect full cost.27 Oman’s Telecommunications Company is currently finalizing its search for a strategic foreign partner. Other sectors targeted for privatization include water and sanitation, cement, hotels, wheat milling, and airport services and maintenance. The authorities indicated that privatization proceeds would probably be used for reducing the government debt and boosting official foreign assets, as well as financing key investments. The staff welcomed the privatization efforts underway because they send a strong signal of the authorities’ commitment to promote private sector activity and enhance confidence. 25 Non-oil exports are also promoted through institutional support from the Omani Center for Investment Promotion and Export Development, and the Oman Development Bank’s Export Guarantee and Financing Unit. Oman is the only country within the GCC with its own national export credit agency. 26 Following a 10 percent depreciation in 1986, the rial Omani exchange rate has remained fixed to the U.S. dollar since then. 27 However, it is expected that economies of scale and the use of gas instead of fuel oil will result in a large reduction in the unit cost of generating electricity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - L 0 =: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public80 Figure 9. Oman and Other GCC Countries: Average Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1990-2000 (Index 1990=100) f UAE l f - ’ -------Y Saudi Arabia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.C............h Bahrain Oman 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Source: IMF, Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - 25. Following the trend in the region, the Omani authorities have also adopted new incentives to attract foreign investment. These include 100 percent foreign ownership of industrial companies and the reduction in the gap between the income taxation of foreign and local companies (Box 2). Regarding other incentives, such as exemptions from customs duties and provision of subsidized loans, power, water, and rents, the staff urged their elimination. Indeed, contrary to other GCC countries, the authorities indicated that they had already started to reduce some of these incentives by limiting the maximum amount of soft loans (to RO 3 million from RO 8 million) and by bringing the cost of these loans closer to market interest rates.28 Nonetheless, they pointed out that, as long as other GCC countries continue to offer similar incentives, their policy in this regard had to follow a regional trend. As in the case of taxation, the staff agreed that there was a need for a regional approach to incentives to avoid unfair competition. The suggestion was also made to encourage investment by harmonizing taxation between majority foreign-owned and Omani companies through the introduction of a single, low corporate income tax rate-eliminating the need for additional incentives, such as tax holidays. The authorities indicated that their medium-term objective is to tax all companies in the country at a single rate below 20 percent. 26. Regarding the labor market, the authorities face a challenge in casting the right balance between maintaining a flexible policy towards the hiring of expatriate workers (who still account for over 60 percent of the labor force) and dealing with the pressures of a rapidly rising local labor force. Although information on the labor market is scant, given that the economy seems to be creating enough jobs, the difficulty in a broader advance of the Omanization of the labor force lies primarily on the segmented nature of the market between nationals and expatriates along skill and wage lines, as well as productivity, particularly for unskilled and low skilled workers. Thus, efforts to address these issues should focus on long- term solutions that seek to (i) strengthen education and training to match the required job skills in the economy and improve productivity, (ii) develop an efficient labor market by establishing an information bank on job seekers, and (iii) reduce the differential in wages and benefits between the public and private sectors.29 Indeed, only those sectors, such as banking, that have emphasized training and education over the long run have seen an important progress in reducing their dependence on expatriate workers. Thus, the staff urged the authorities to continue to rely on market mechanisms to pursue Omanization objectives, as well as to apply the quota system with flexibility. In this context, it welcomed the large resources earmarked for human capital development over the next five years (about US$O.5 billion) and the permission to establish four private universities in the country. 28 The interest rate is currently 9 percent a year, of which the government subsidizes one- third; but the subsidized rate varies across regions. 29 An ongoing policy discussion on labor market issues between the authorities and the World Bank has argued against enforcement of Omanization targets at the sector and firm levels, and has, instead, recommended improving Oman’s education system so as to increase labor productivity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26 - Box 2. Key Economic Reforms Recently Adopted or Underway Fiscal and Administrative Reforms Reforms adopted . Amending the commercial company law to eliminate the sole agency monopoly. . Establishing the commercial court for speedy processing of commercial litigations. . Restructuring the Public Telecommunications Authority into a closed company, and liquidating the Public Authority for Agriculture. . Establishing a one-stop service for prospective local and foreign investors. Measures underway . Simplifying the corporate income tax law. . Merging the public pension funds from currently nine into two. Privatization of Public Enterprises Reforms adopted . Divesting most of the state assets in tourism, banking, and insurance companies. . Privatizing the Salalah port management. . Privatizing the Public Transport Company. . Giving the private sector the right to build, own, and operate (BOO) four new power stations. . Privatizing the whole Salalah region power system. Measures underway . Partially privatizing the telecommunications company and establishing a regulatory framework. . Privatizing the management of Salalah and Seeb Airports. . Privatizing the Muscat Waste Water Project. . Proceeding at different stages of privatizing government assets in the power sector, and continuing to assign all new projects to the private sector under a BOO scheme, as well as establishing a regulatory framework. Financial Sector Reforms adopted . Expanding repo facilities to the interbank market. . Restructuring the MSM into three separate bodies dealing with regulations, trading and exchange, and depository registration. . Adopting a new banking law. Measures underway . Issuing short-term central bank CDs. n Opening a monetary policy unit at the Central Bank of Oman. . Introducing a reverse repo facility. Labor Market Reforms adopted . Introducing measures to improve vocational and technical training programs, and passing new legislation that allows private universities. . Setting a uniform minimum wage for Omanis at RO 100 (plus RO 20 as transportation allowance) instead of the previous two-tiered (skilled/unskilled) minimum wage. Measures underway . Establishing a national registration system for job seekers. . Imposing mandatory health insurance requirement on expatriate labor. Foreign Investment Reforms adopted . Reducing income tax disparity between Omani and foreign companies by raising the single rate for the former from 7.5 percent to 12 percent, and lowering the rates for the latter from 15-50 percent to 5-30 percent. . Redefining “foreign” company as one with more than 70 percent foreign ownership instead of currently 49 percent. n Allowing foreign, non-GCC, firms to own buildings and lease land. . Allowing 100 nercent foreign ownershin of comnanies in most sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - C. Statistical Issues 27. Oman has made important progress in recent years in improving the compilation and dissemination of economic and financial statistics and transparency. The staff, however, encouraged the authorities to publish a consolidated position of the general government accounts to further enhance transparency. This position would include the central government’s budget as well as data on the financial transactions of the SGRF, Oil Fund, and public pension funds.30 In addition, this consolidated presentation would be an important step toward harmonizing fiscal statistics presentation across GCC countries.31 The staff also encouraged the authorities to broaden and regularly publish information on the country’s total external debt and labor statistics, including wages in the public and private sector. It welcomed ongoing efforts at improving balance of payments statistics with Fund’s technical assistance, as well as the authorities’ decision to participate in the Fund’s GDDS. III. STAFF APPRAISAL 28. The authorities respondedto the windfall oil gains of 1999 and 2000 by repaying short-term external and domestic debt, and building up sizeable official foreign assets, despite larger-than-budgeted increases in expenditure, particularly defense. While growth recovered, inflation remained insignificant, and Oman’s fiscal and external positions shifted into large surpluses. 29. The authorities’ greatest challenges remain, however, the diversification of the economy and job creation for a rapidly growing Omani labor force. In this context, following the recent completion of the liquefied natural gas (LNG) and transshipment port projects, Oman’s ambitious investment program underway on gas-based industries and tourism would further diversify the economy, strengthen the export base, and accelerate job creation. The staff also encourages the authorities to rely more on equity participation than on debt-creation to finance the investment program. The latter, together with ongoing structural reforms, augurs well for growth and employment in the period ahead. 30. The staff commends the authorities for moving resolutely on economic reforms, particularly privatization and the creation of a level playing field between foreign and local companies. It urges the authorities to harmonize taxation between these companies through the adoption of a single, low corporate income tax rate. To support these reforms, the staff cautions against any weakening in fiscal discipline, as the external current account 3o This information is provided to Fund staff during consultations. For further details see Appendix V. 31 No GCC country publishes a consolidated presentation of the public finances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - surplus is expected to temporarily shift to a deficit in the next few years, reflecting expected lower world crude oil prices and rising imports associated to the investment program. 31. To avoid a weakening in the fiscal position, the authorities are encouraged to mobilize non-oil revenue and rationalize expenditure. Revenue measures could include extending excises to selected services, eliminating the exemptions from import duties, increasing subsidized utility rates for water and electricity, as well as adopting a broad-based general sales tax, and abolishing subsidies in coordination with other GCC countries, in view of their open borders. On the expenditure side, reducing defense spending, outsourcing services to the private sector, containing the wage bill growth, and substituting targeted transfers for price subsidies, would improve the structure of the budget and economic efficiency. As a result of these steps, government current fiscal deficit would be more in line with the permanent rent of Oman’s oil and gas wealth, ensuring intergenerational economic equity. In addition, the staff recommends that the authorities adhere to expenditure limits imposed by the annual budget instead of resorting to supplementary budgets other than under exceptional circumstances. 32. The staff emphasizes the importance of recognizing the State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) as the savings fund for the future generations. To this end, it proposes that budget deficit financing should be mainly undertaken through issuance of government securities. These would be bought by the fund as part of a balanced portfolio investment, with the cost of this financing and obligations to the SGRF fully reflected in the budget. Such a separation together with the disclosure of the fund’s operations to the public would also enforce better budgetary discipline and enhance fiscal transparency. 33. Oman’s banking system appears to be sound and well supervised based on key financial indicators. In this context, barring exceptional circumstances, the staff recommends that the authorities lift both the remaining interest rate and quantitative ceilings on personal loans simultaneously to foster competition and promote a more efficient allocation of resources, while relying more on indirect monetary instruments to manage liquidity. It also recommends that the authorities tighten credit standards for personal loans to reduce the risks for loan defaults-by encouraging banks to develop a modem credit analysis infrastructure-as well as to allow public pension funds to allocate part of their assets in long-term deposits with local banks. The staff commends the authorities for their ongoing efforts to bring prudential regulations and bank supervision to the highest internationally accepted standards and to improve corporate governance, as well as for their decision to carry out a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), but urges the authorities to withstand any calls to prop up the declining stock market. 34. The staff continues to endorse the authorities’ commitment to the exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar. This arrangement has anchored economic stability, enhanced development, and strengthened confidence. It emphasizes that fiscal discipline and a sound banking system, particularly under high capital mobility, are crucial elements to support this arrangement, while private sector and human capital development would further enhance competitiveness. In this context, the staff welcomes the large resources earmarked to finance Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - education and the training of nationals over the next five years. It-suggests to the authorities that they continue to rely on market mechanisms and to apply with flexibility the quota system to increase the participation rate of Omanis in the labor force. 35. The quality and timeliness of data provision to the Fund for the conduct of surveillance remain adequate. The staff welcomes the authorities’ unrelenting efforts to improve Oman’s statistics. To further enhance data availability, it suggests that the authorities make information more widely available by publishing the country’s external debt, particularly on the nongovernment sector, and labor statistics, including on wages in both the public and private sector, as well as consider presenting a consolidated picture of the fiscal accounts, including the financial transactions of the State General Reserve Fund. This consolidated presentation would be an important step toward harmonizing fiscal statistics among GCC countries. The staff commends the authorities for their decision to participate in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). 36. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Oman take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 1. Oman: Basic Economic Indicators, 1996-2001 1996 1997 1998 Prel. 1999 Est. 2000 Proj. 2001 National income, production, and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of RO) Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP) Ofwhich : private sector National saving (in percent of GDP) Real GDP Oil and gas Other sectors Crude oil output (thousand barrels per day) Average oil export prices (US$/barrel) LNG production (million tons) Consumer prices (Muscat) Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) I/ Central government finances Total revenue and grants Total expenditure and net lending, Of which: Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding oil revenue Total government debt Money and credit Broad money Net foreign assets Net domestic assets, Of which : Private sector Financial market indicators Time deposit rates (percent; RO deposits) Muscat Stock Market index Balance of payments Exports, Of which : Oil and oil products Gas (LNG) Imports Services and income (net) Current account balance As percent of GDP External assets and debt Total offtcial foreign assets Central bank foreign assets In months of imports In percent of total short-term external debt 2/ Government foreign assets (SGRF) In percent of GDP Total external debt In percent of GDP In percent of current account receipts Short-term external debt 2/ Debt service in percent of current account receipts Public sector external debt In percent of GDP 5,874 13.7 5.7 14.9 2.9 3.8 2.4 889 19.42 0.0 0.3 2.8 41.8 38.3 31.6 6.7 3.5 -28.9 27.7 8.1 -5.5 30.6 15.3 6.9 199.4 7,340 5,883 0 -4,728 -1,111 179 1.2 4,243 2,031 5.2 153 2,212 14.5 3,792 24.8 50.4 1,328.5 10.6 3,136 20.5 (Percent change, unless otherwise indicated) 6,090 5,416 6,000 7,614 17.6 24.0 14.8 12.6 6.3 9.8 4.8 4.8 14.2 -0.7 11.7 26.0 6.2 2.7 -1.0 4.7 2.7 -0.1 -0.4 10.0 8.3 4.4 -1.3 1.8 903 899 905 958 18.62 11.92 17.35 26.70 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.2 -0.2 -0.5 0.5 -1.0 2.8 -0.1 -1.8 2.0 (In percent of GDP at market prices) 42.0 35.3 39.0 47.1 37.8 41.0 37.9 35.3 30.5 33.0 30.5 28.6 6.0 7.9 6.9 6.4 4.2 -5.7 1.2 11.8 -28.6 -29.1 -27.4 -28.1 25.0 32.5 27.2 20.8 (Annual percent change) 24.5 4.8 6.4 6.0 11.4 -34.1 26.8 -6.7 40.3 41.8 -2.6 13.4 38.7 18.1 8.6 0.9 7.3 8.5 8.1 7.6 480.6 228.5 250.0 201.2 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 7,63 1 5,509 7,215 11,125 5,785 3,707 5,510 9,200 0 0 0 466 -5,191 -5,826 -4,801 -5,147 -1,413 -1,531 -1,468 -1,809 -405 -3,280 -456 2,676 -2.6 -23.3 -2.9 13.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 4,640 4,066 4,169 6,192 2,139 2,007 2,836 2,448 4.9 4.1 7.1 5.7 123 82 138 123 2,502 2,059 1,333 3,744 15.8 14.6 8.5 18.9 4,607 6,312 6,771 6,962 29.1 44.8 43.4 35.2 58.9 110.5 91.9 61.1 1,740.5 2,434.3 2,058.7 1,998.l 7.3 13.6 7.5 6.1 2,957 3,209 2,912 2,869 18.7 22.8 18.7 14.5 7,719 16.8 8.6 24.7 6.5 8.1 5.5 974 24.14 5.3 0.9 . . . 47.7 37.3 30.2 6.6 10.5 -28.2 17.3 7.4 24.8 -0.9 3.5 . . . . . . 11,097 9,037 1,011 -6,186 -1,820 1,634 8.1 7,617 2,848 5.5 114 4,769 23.8 6,73 1 33.5 59.7 2,505.l 11.2 2,401 12.0 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Based on IMF Information Notice System, period average. 2/ On a remaining maturity basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 2. Oman: Government Finances, 1996-2001 (In millions of rials Omani) 1996 1997 1998 Budg. J3& Budg. Proj. 1999 2000 2000 2001 2001 Revenues 11 2445.1 2,535.3 1,904.o 2,335.8 Oil revenue 1,904.l 1,998.0 1,267.6 L708.3 LNG related revenue (net) 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 Non-oil revenue 541.0 537.3 636.4 624.2 Tax revenue 118.7 111.4 148.8 159.2 Non-tax revenue, Of which: 422.3 425.9 487.6 465.0 Public services and utilities 109.1 123.5 128.5 131.0 Investment income 2/ 92.4 82.0 95.0 76.3 Grants (net) 3.8 11.8 -1.6 -1.2 Expenditures 2,247.8 2,221.5 2,218.5 2,243.3 Current 1,856.2 1,854.7 1,789.l 1,831.0 Civil 1,034.9 996.3 1,024.O 1,069.4 Wage bill 544.0 523.0 549.9 569.6 Goods and services 292.9 305.0 309.9 323.8 Subsidies and transfers 76.8 62.3 62.6 77.2 Interest payments 121.2 106.0 101.6 98.8 Defense 732.5 750.4 675.8 683.2 PDO operations 88.8 108.0 89.3 78.4 Capital 391.6 366.8 429.4 412.3 Civil 204.7 206.6 234.4 236.4 PDO capital 162.7 140.5 179.3 170.1 Gas development 24.2 19.7 15.7 5.8 Net lending and equity -6.0 69.8 -7.8 22.1 Overall surplus/deficit (-) 31 207.1 255.8 -308.3 69.2 (In percent of GDP) 3.5 4.2 -5.7 1.2 Financing Foreign loans (net) Bond sales abroad (net) Oil Fund SGRF (net) 4/ Foreign resources Domestic resources Banking system Discrepancy 51 (In percent of GDP) Memorandum items: Non-oil current balance 61 (In percent of GDP) Non-oil/LNG overall balance (In percent of GDP) Non-interest expenditure -207.1 -255.8 308.3 -69.2 56.9 -42.7 117.9 -118.9 -0.7 -26.3 -21.1 4.9 -40.0 -31.6 -26.0 -33.9 -69.9 -146.3 243.4 26.1 -79.9 -120.7 217.4 226.3 10.0 -25.6 26.0 -200.2 -28.9 -96.6 165.7 -66.1 -124.5 87.7 -171.6 118.7 -2.1 1.4 -3.2 2.0 -1,501.2 -1,558.8 -1,361.2 -1,436.3 -25.6 -25.6 -25.1 -23.9 -1,697.0 -1,742.2 -1,575.9 -1,642.4 -28.9 -28.6 -29.1 -27.4 2,126.6 2,115.5 2,116.9 2,144.5 2,082.O 1,508.4 . . . 573.6 157.1 416.5 . . . . . . 3.0 2,406.O 1,926.0 1,174.0 602.9 381.1 70.0 120.0 673.0 79.0 480.0 285.0 183.0 12.0 25.0 -346.0 . . . 346.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0 0.0 3,578.7 2,872.5 159.9 546.4 129.7 416.7 139.1 86.8 2,471.0 1,876.4 . . . 594.6 149.3 445.3 . . . . . . 22.0 2,759.0 2,246.0 1,237.0 624.0 451.0 52.0 110.0 926.0 83.0 513.0 292.0 197.0 24.0 29.0 -295.0 -3.8 295.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0 0.0 3,658.2 2,821.5 162.1 674.5 153.3 521.2 149.4 168.6 3.0 22.0 2,667.0 2,178.9 1,266.4 628.5 436.0 81.8 120.1 829.6 82.9 488.1 293.1 183.0 12.0 2,841.8 2,328.8 1,319.8 664.5 483.5 61.8 110.0 926.0 83.0 513.0 292.0 197.0 24.0 18.0 29.0 896.7 11.8 809.4 10.5 -896.7 -18.9 2.4 -55.4 -788.4 -1,006.9 218.5 7.1 -43.5 -0.6 -809.4 -170.0 -10.0 -50.1 -464.4 -464.4 0.0 -114.9 0.0 0.0 . . . -1,891.6 a.. -1,917.8 . . . -24.8 . . . -24.8 . . . -2,135.6 . . . -2,174.3 . . . -28.1 . . . -28.2 . . . 2,546.9 . . . 2,73 1.8 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes oil revenue “assigned” to SGRF and Oil Fund. Budget presentations exclude this revenue. 21 Includes investment income of SGRF and Oil Fund, which are excluded in the budget. 31 Fiscal balance is on accruals basis. Discrepancy includes timing differences with balance on cash basis. 41 Excluding valuation adjustments. 51 Discrepancy Includes timing differences with balance on cash basis. 61 Includes estimated depreciation of government capital stock. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 3. Oman: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Est. prqi. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Trade balance Exports, fob Oil and gas products Crude oil Of which Condensates (upstream) Liquefied natural gas Other exports Re-exports Imports, cif Of which Capital imports Services and Income (net) Income (net), Ofwhich : PDO and other oil comnanv remittances Services (net) Transfers (net), Ofwhich: Private transfers Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Financial account (net), Ofwhich: Official capital (net) Medium- and long-term loans Short-term loans Development bonds Oil Fund assets SGRF assets Hydrocarbon sector capital (net), Ofwhich: Gas sector direct investment Amortization upstream loans LNG loans (downstream) Amortization downstream loans New projects net inflows Commercial banks (net) Other capital (net) Errors and omissions Overall balance Change in central bank foreign assets Memorandum items: Import volume growth Of which I/ Consumer goods Capital imports Non-oil export volume growth: 21 Omani exports Re-exports 2,612 2,439 -3 17 2,414 5,977 4,911 7,340 7,63 1 5,509 7,215 11,125 11,097 5,883 5,785 3,707 5,510 9,200 9,037 5,758 5,647 3,575 5,381 8,529 7,857 0 45: 1,006 -4,728 -731 -828 -1,009 -743 -806 -1,111 -1,413 -1,53 1 -1,468 -1,809 -646 -952 -1,056 -979 -1,230 -312 -296 -255 -343 -494 -464 -461 -475 -489 -1,322 -1,431 -1,432 -1,402 -1,332 -1,462 -1,428 -1,399 179 -405 -3,280 -456 1.2 -2.6 -23.3 -2.9 209 216 3,482 1,095 -10 -551 627 342 110 -80 5 0 38 -31 302 -309 -2 -68 -55 13 -104 -82 -68 -88 -52 -289 443 726 -133 729 1,504 240 0 173 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 750 416 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 267 -157 750 373 86 195 601 140 -258 296 -334 190 131 108 -132 829 -131 -108 132 -829 -579 -1,492 -1,500 2,676 13.5 -3,064 -2,598 -96 47 6 -144 -2,411 65 40 -71 183 0 203 -243 -288 0 -388 388 10.6 6.2 13.6 -2.1 23.5 0 0 0 641 640 0 0 0 466 1,011 528 518 522 616 666 1,318 1,285 1,183 1,308 1,395 -5,191 -5,826 -4,801 -5,147 -6,186 -1,110 -1,820 -1,224 -300 -597 -1,457 -1,514 1,634 8.1 -1,234 -1,624 -442 0 -26 -130 -1,025 -222 0 -170 61 -166 732 -100 -19 0 400 -400 (Annual change in percent) 18.2 15.2 -15.6 13.6 16.8 4.0 -22.5 4.6 13.3 21.9 -26.3 8.4 22.8 -1.4 1.4 18.5 37.3 -1.9 -7.5 11.0 19.2 9.0 37.7 7.4 6.0 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Oman; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Weighted by composition of trade. 2/ Based on data for partner countries that together account for at least 95 percent of trade of Oman. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 4. Oman: Monetary Survey, 1996-2001 (In millions of rials Omani) End of period 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj . 2001 Broad money Money Currency outside banks Demand deposits Quasi-money Of which Foreign currency deposits l! Foreign assets (net) 891.4 993.0 654.1 829.3 773.8 966.0 Central bank 780.3 821.7 771.2 1,090.o 941.0 1,094.8 Commercial banks 111.1 171.3 -117.1 -260.7 -167.2 -128.8 Domestic assets 742.4 1,041.4 1,477.2 1,438.2 1,630.2 1,615.6 Claims on government (net) -19.6 -146.3 8.2 -220.3 -4.5 -119.1 Central bank (net) 15.9 -13.9 102.6 -238.8 -21.5 -22.2 Claims on government 47.0 32.7 159.6 3.8 4.5 3.8 Government deposits 31 31.1 46.6 57.0 242.6 26.0 26.0 Commercial banks (net) -35.5 -132.4 -94.4 18.5 17.0 -96.9 Claims on government 21 175.8 157.4 198.0 334.6 323.0 253.1 Government deposits 31 211.3 289.8 292.4 316.1 306.0 350.0 Claims on public enterprises 4.8 0.6 0.0 4.1 16.3 17.0 Claims on private sector 1,564.9 2,170.9 2,563.1 2,783.3 2,809.2 2,908.5 Other items (net) -807.7 -983.8 -1,094.l Central bank -565.0 -565.5 -629.5 Commercial banks -242.7 -418.3 -464.6 Memorandum items Broad money Foreign assets (net) Net domestic assets Of which Claims on private sector 1,633.8 2,034.3 502.3 539.0 231.2 242.2 271.1 296.8 1,131s 1,495.3 194.7 -1,128.9 -1,190.8 -1,190.8 -577.7 -642.7 . . . -551.2 -548.1 . . . 8.1 24.5 4.8 6.4 6.0 7.4 -5.5 11.4 -34.1 26.8 -6.7 24.8 30.6 40.3 41.8 -2.6 13.4 -0.9 15.3 241.2 38.7 2,131.3 2,267.5 2,404.O 2,581.6 502.8 509.5 533.9 547.1 244.3 273.5 276.8 282.3 258.5 236.0 257.1 264.8 1,628.5 1,758.0 1,870.l 2,034.5 261.0 204.2 221.9 221.9 18.1 8.6 0.9 3.5 Sources: Central Bank of Oman; and Fund staff projections. 11 Includes foreign currency deposits and deposits relating to letters of credit. 21 Include treasury bills and development bonds. 31 Includes SGRF deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 5. Oman. Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-200 1 1997 1998 Prel. J& Proj. 1999 2000 2001 External solvency indicators Real effective unchanged rate (CPI based - period average) l/ Total external debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) Short-term debt (on a remaining maturity) 2/ External debt/GDP Total external debt/total exports of goods and service Short-term debt (remaining maturity basis)/ total exports of goods and services Total external debt service/total exports of goods and service Public sector solvency indicators Central government total debt/GDP Debt service/total revenue Interest payments/total revenue Distribution of central government total debt by holders: Local commercial banks Central Bank of Oman Foreign investors and banks Pension funds and others Oil and gas revenue/total revenue External liquidity indicators Total official foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Central Bank of Oman In months of imports of goods and services 31 Vis-a-vis short-term external debt (remaining maturity basis) Vis-a-vis Ml (In percent; unless otherwise Indicated) 2.8 -0.1 -1.8 1.9 . . . 4,607.3 6,311.9 6,770.5 6,962.3 6,73 1.4 1,740.5 2,434.3 2,058.7 1,998.l 2,505.l 29.1 44.8 43.4 35.2 33.5 60.2 114.2 93.6 62.4 60.5 22.8 44.0 28.5 17.9 22.5 7.5 14.1 7.7 6.2 11.4 25.0 32.5 27.2 20.8 17.3 5.2 7.2 7.1 4.1 3.9 2.7 3.8 2.8 2.3 2.1 10.3 11.2 20.5 20.4 19.0 2.1 9.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 74.3 70.1 68.5 69.6 69.2 13.3 9.6 10.8 9.7 11.6 78.8 66.6 73.3 84.7 81.6 State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) Commercial banks net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Oil and gas exports/total exports Financial sector indicators Foreign currency deposits/total deposits 41 Nonperforming loans/total loans Net domestic credit (percent change) Private sector credit (percent change) Net domestic credit/GDP Private sector credit/GDP Private sector credit/total assets of banks Market assessment 4,640 4,066 4,169 6,192 7,617 2,139 2,007 2,836 2,448 2,848 4.9 4.1 7.1 5.7 5.5 123 82 138 123 114 153 153 214 176 200 2,501.6 2,058.9 1,332.6 3,743.5 4,769.0 445.5 -304.6 -678.0 -434.9 -334.9 1,776.8 1,222.6 992.2 L215.6 1,315.6 1,331.3 1,527.2 L670.2 1,650.5 1,650.5 75.8 67.3 76.4 82.7 81.4 13.5 13.8 10.2 10.4 8.1 6.4 6.0 6.2 40.3 41.8 -2.6 13.4 38.7 18.1 8.6 0.9 17.1 27.3 24.0 21.4 35.6 47.3 46.4 36.9 64.5 71.6 72.4 70.9 Stock market index (percent change; end period) 141.1 -52.5 9.5 -19.6 Banking sector stock market index (percent change) 223.1 -60.6 20.5 -18.2 Interest rate spread (basis points) 5/ 41.8 -59.7 -109.2 23.6 Moody’s investor services rating 61 Baa2 Baa2 Baa2 Baa2 9.7 . . . -0.9 3.5 20.9 37.7 71.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . Sources: Omani; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Based on IMF, Information Notice System weights. 2/ Includes amortization of the medium-and long-term due in the period. 3/ Imports of goods and services projected for the next 12 months, 41 Total deposits include Quasi-money and demand deposits 5/ Spread between 3-month U.S. dollar deposits and 3-month Omani rial deposits, annual averages, 2000 to November 2000. 6/ Long-term bonds and notes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Table 6. Oman: Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2006 Est. Projections 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 National income, production, and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of RO) Real GDP Oil, gas, and LNG Other sectors Consumer price index (Muscat) Crude oil output (thousand barrels per day) Average oil export prices (US$/barrel) LNG production (million tons) 6,000 7,614 7,719 7,607 7,653 7,998 8,288 8,623 -1.0 4.7 6.5 4.5 5.8 4.8 3.8 3.6 -0.4 10.0 8.1 2.8 6.3 3.5 0.9 0.2 -1.3 1.8 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 0.5 -1.0 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 905 958 974 980 985 985 985 985 17.3 26.7 24.1 21.3 18.9 18.7 18.5 18.5 0.0 2.2 5.3 6.1 8.0 9.6 9.7 9.7 Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP) 14.8 National saving (in percent of GDP) 11.7 Central government finances Total revenue and grants, Of which : Hydrocarbon revenue Total expenditure and net lending, Of which : Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding oil revenue Non-oil current balance l/ Total government debt 39.0 28.5 37.9 30.5 6.9 1.2 -27.4 -23.9 27.2 Balance of payments Exports, Of which : Oil and products Gas (LNG) Imports Current account balance As a percent of GDP 7,215 11,125 11,097 10,375 9,957 10,383 10,687 11,025 5,510 9,200 9,037 8,150 7,557 7,696 7,596 7,580 0 466 1,011 1,040 1,216 1,451 1,446 1,446 -4,801 -5,147 -6,186 -7,174 -7,646 -7,056 -6,637 -6,992 -456 2,676 1,634 -298 -1,211 -225 533 547 -2.9 13.5 8.1 -1.5 -6.1 -1.1 2.5 2.4 External assets and debt Total official foreign assets In percent of GDP Central bank foreign assets In months of imports In percent of total short-term external debt Government foreign assets (SGRF) In percent of GDP Total external debt In percent of GDP 4,169 6,192 7,617 8,626 9,279 10,049 10,900 11,698 26.7 31.3 38.0 43.6 46.6 48.3 50.6 52.2 2,836 2,448 2,848 2,848 2,848 2,848 3,048 3,248 7.1 5.7 5.5 4.8 4.5 4.8 5.5 5.6 138 123 114 114 119 121 123 128 1,333 3,744 4,769 5,777 6,43 1 7,201 7,852 8,450 8.5 18.9 23.8 29.2 32.3 34.6 36.4 37.7 6,771 6,962 6,73 1 7,129 7,818 7,984 7,662 7,243 43.4 35.2 33.5 36.0 39.3 38.4 35.5 32.3 (Percent change; unless otherwise indicated) 12.6 16.8 22.5 24.1 19.7 17.0 26.0 24.7 20.8 17.7 18.4 19.3 (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) 47.1 47.7 44.4 41.7 40.3 39.6 39.8 38.7 35.1 32.0 30.9 30.3 35.3 37.3 37.6 37.7 36.5 36.7 28.6 30.2 30.1 29.9 28.7 28.8 6.4 6.6 7.1 7.4 7.4 7.4 11.8 10.5 6.8 4.0 3.8 2.9 -28.1 -28.2 -28.3 -28.0 -27.1 -27.4 -24.8 -24.8 -24.8 -24.4 -23.5 -23.6 20.8 17.3 15.2 13.4 11.6 10.1 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 17.3 19.6 38.8 29.5 36.3 28.4 7.5 2.4 -27.1 -23.3 8.6 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 Includes estimated depreciation of government capital stock. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX I Social and Demographic Indicators in Selected Years 1980 1990 1999 GDP per capita (in current U.S. dollars) Population characteristics Total population (in thousand) Omani population Total population growth rate (in percent ) 11 Omani population Omani population participation rate (in percent) 21 Male Female Omani population by age distribution (in percent) o-14 15-64 65+ Health Life expectancy at birth (years) Overall Female Birth rate (per 1,000 population) Crude death rate (per 1,000 population) Infant mortality (per 1,000 life births) Population per physician (in thousand) Expenditure share from total government expenditure (in percent) Education General education Pupil-teacher ratio (in percent) Schools (number) Students (in thousand) Students (in percent) Primary Preparatory Secondary Expenditure share from total government expenditure (in percent) Students in higher education Technical colleges Teacher training University 31 Others 41 5,361 7,191 6,712 1,060 1,625 914 1,321 7.5 4.2 4.0 3.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,325 1,729 1.7 2.6 22.7 19.6 3.1 . . . . . . . . . 53 45 2 44 53 3 57.5 66.5 . . . . . . 50.0 44.7 13.3 7.6 64 29 3.7 1.1 2.4 3.9 72.5 74.3 30.0 3.6 18.0 0.7 6.1 21 24 22 373 779 980 107 356 542 86.0 72.5 51.7 13.1 20.2 26.4 1.9 7.3 17.9 4.0 7.2 9.2 0 459 4,319 483 2,244 8,720 0 3,021 7,530 1,282 918 11,360 Source: Ministry of National Economy l! From previous year. 21 Ratio of Omani labor force to Omani population. 31 The national university was established in 1986. 41 Includes students in private colleges and universities abroad. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX II THE OMANI BANKING SYSTEM ’ - I. STRUCTURE OF THE FINANCIAL SECTOR 1. The Omani banking system consists of a relatively large number of institutions, but is dominated by three local banks.2 After a series of mergers during the 199Os, there are currently 15 commercial banks, of which nine are branches of foreign banks and six are locally incorporated.3 The three largest banks accounted for 72 percent of total assets, 69 percent of total deposits, and 72 percent of total loans, and had combined assets of RO 2.8 billion (US$7.3 billion) at the end of 2000. The country had 33 1 branches of commercial banks at the end of 2000, averaging around 7,300 people per branch (this compares to around 14,300 in Kuwait). This relatively high number of branches per population reflects a government policy to expand banking services to non-Muscat and remote areas to mobilize resources. All commercial banks are privately owned, with the government owning minority stakes in a few.4 Foreign participation in local banks is currently limited to a maximum equity share of up to 49 percent, but as a result of Oman’s membership in the WTO, this limit would be gradually increased in the coming years. 2. There are also four specialized banks. Two are public banks-the Oman Housing Bank (OHB) and the Oman Development Bank (ODB)-that provide soft financing (subsidized by the government) to mainly low and middle-income Omanis to build or purchase residential property and to private sector investors to finance small projects. The other two specialized banks are in the private sector-Alliance Housing Bank (AHB) and Industrial Bank of Oman (IBO)-and were established in 1998 to provide mortgage loans and lending to industrial and infrastructure activities. The ODB also encompasses the Export Credit Guarantee Agency (ECGA)-established in 199 1 with a capital of RO 7 million-to promote Omani non-oil exports by providing export credit insurance. In 1989, an investment banking regulation was adopted. Currently, there are 11 commercial banks that practice investment-banking activities, and one specialized bank. ’ The Appendix was prepared by Ms. Farhan. 2 These three banks are Bank Muscat/Commercial Bank of Oman, the National Bank of Oman, and Oman International Bank. 3 In 1993 and 1994, six commercial banks were involved in mergers: in 1998, there was a further bank merger; and at the end of 2000, a merger of two of the country’s biggest banks took place (Bank Muscat and Commercial Bank of Oman). 4 The government had, through the Diwan of the Royal Court, a direct share holding in Bank Muscat of 26.9 percent at the end of 1999, and a minority stake in the Commercial Bank of Oman. Following the merger, the Diwan and its pension fund own 30.2 percent of total shares. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX II 3. Commercial bank liabilities are dominated by deposits, which represented 63 percent of total liabilities at the end of 2000. Of total liabilities, around 50 percent are private sector deposits, and of those, time deposits represent some 66 percent of the total, with the balance split between demand and savings deposits. Around 14 percent of total liabilities are balances due to banks abroad. Private sector deposits represented around 28 percent of GDP at the end of December 2000. A deposit insurance scheme was established in 1995, providing protection of the lower of net deposits of up to RO 20,000 (US$52,000) per account, or 75 percent of total deposits for each depositor. 4. On the assets side, lending to the private sector accounts for around 74 percent of total assets, with personal loans commanding the majority, at around 34 percent of total private sector credit, followed by import trade (13 percent). 10 percent of total assets are in securities, including government bonds and Treasury bills. In terms of growth rates, loans to the manufacturing sector experienced the largest category increase in 1999, following the adoption of interest rate and quantitative ceilings on personal loans. In 2000, loans to financial institutions experienced the highest growth rate of around 20 percent. 5. Other financial institutions in Oman include 22 insurance companies, of which seven are local, ten public pension funds, two private pension funds, hire-purchase, finance and leasing companies, around 45 moneychangers, and a stock market the Muscat Stock Market, (MSM). The latter was established in 1989 with a market capitalization of RO 264.3 million, increasing to RO 1.4 billion by December 2000. Companies list on the parallel market until they are fully compliant with listing requirements, after which they list on the regular market. There were 45 companies listed on the regular market and 8 1 companies on the parallel market at the end of 2000. There are 16 stockbrokers and the government is encouraging mergers amongst those, due to capital adequacy concerns. There is one corporate bond listed (of Bank Muscat, listed after the merger in January 2001) while no derivatives are traded on the market. 6. The capital market is dominated by trading in government securities (development bonds and Treasury bills). Beginning in 1991, the government began issuing bonds mostly for funding its capital expenditures, Banks are allowed to buy a maximum of 30 percent of their net worth in development bonds, and these are sold to both residents and non-residents. There are no limits on the amounts of Treasury bills they can buy, and only banks can directly buy those. The government securities market appears well organized and relatively transparent, with a quarterly issue schedule and an annual borrowing plan prepared and published. The outstanding stock of government bonds held by local and foreign entities stood at RO 347.9 million at the end of 2000, of which RO 25 1.8 million was held by residents and RO 96.1 million by non-residents. Of the local portion, commercial banks held RO 120.9 million. Secondary trading in bonds is minimal; the market, therefore, remains thin. 7. There is a money market wherein short-term funds are provided-the interbank call money market-and there is also a bill market, where Treasury bills and Commercial bills are exchanged. In June 1999, a longer-maturity TB was introduced-l 82 days-and issuance of 364-day bills is under consideration in an attempt to develop a yield curve. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX II 8. In 1998, the CBO introduced a system of repo facilities between banks and the CBO for government securities (such as Treasury bills and development bonds). The spread between the average lending rate and the average repo rate on government treasury bills was 4.7 percentage points in 1999. This fell to 4.6 percentage points in 2000, as the average repo rate dropped by 32 basis points in 2000 from its 1999 levels, whereas the average lending rate dropped by 42 basis points over the period. The CBO introduced a new rule regarding the repo rate, effective June 2000, as it observed that banks were approaching the CBO more frequently for repo transactions instead of dealing between themselves in the interbank market, leading to the impression that the interbank market is not fully utilized and that the CBO is utilized as a first resort for funds. This new rule stated that: “The repo rate which the CBO applies for the purchase of government securities for a maximum period of 28 days shall be based on the latest average yield of 91-day Treasury bills plus 75 basis points”. This intervention was aimed at encouraging the banks to resort to each other more frequently when in need of funds. II. PERFORMANCEOFTHEBANKINGSECTOR 9. A number of indicators-summarized in Table l-suggest that the banking system in Oman was in a sound position in 2000. The capital adequacy ratio was in excess of the Base1 Committee recommended minimum, the share of nonperforming loans to total loans was low and well provisioned, and returns on assets and equity remained adequate. Capital adequacy 10. Banks in Oman have been in full compliance with the minimum-recommended Base1 capital adequacy ratio requirements of 8 percent since 1992. The CBO stipulated that all local banks and branches of foreign banks must maintain a minimum risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio of 12 percent at all times. The risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio ranged between 13 percent and 18.9 percent among the five largest commercial banks. Computations are made on both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet risks. Banks report on a quarterly basis, and the computations are made in accordance with recommendations of the Base1 Capital Accord. Asset quality 11. Data on asset quality suggests that the banking sector is in a comfortable position. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans was 6.0 percent in 1999 and 6.2 percent through September 2000. Among the top five banks, this ratio ranged between 2 percent and 7.7 percent in 1999. 33 percent of gross profits in 1999 were earmarked as provisions for doubtful debts and for a possible decline in the value of investments. This was up from 19 percent in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II Table 1. Banking Sector Indicators - (In percent, unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Number of licensed commercial banks Total assets (RO million) Number of banks accounting for over 70 percent of total assets Claims on government/total credit 11 Credit to private sector/total credit 21 Total commercial bank deposits (RO million) In percent of GDP Lending ratio Time & savings deposits/total dep. of the private sector Loans/deposits 31 Return on assets Return on equity Net interest income/gross income Foreign assets/total assets Investment in local government bonds/total assets Investment in local government Treasury bills/total assets Investment in foreign securities/total assets Investment in local stock market/total assets Capital & reserves/total deposits Foreign currency deposits/quasi-money deposits Foreign assets/foreign liabilities Commercial banks net profits growth 41 Average lending rates in local currency Average total deposit rates in local currency Nonperforming loans/total loans Provisions/loans 51 Provisions for doubtful debts/gross profits Private sector deposits/GDP 41 Total private sector credit/GDP 4161 Bank stock market price index (percentage change) 17 3,366.5 5 6.8 93.2 2,095.9 34.4 68.7 80.6 . . . 2.0 22.4 69.9 20.3 1.7 1.6 0.1 0.6 17.0 16.1 133.5 55.7 9.18 4.17 8.1 6.0 12.1 29.4 35.6 323.1 16 16 3,579.8 3,842.7 4 4 7.2 10.7 92.8 89.2 2,193.9 2,349.5 40.5 39.2 81.8 81.7 84.3 86.5 119 122 1.9 1.6 16.7 13.2 74.0 77.2 13.1 9.9 2.0 3.0 2.4 3.3 3.5 2.3 0.9 0.9 22.6 22.8 16.0 11.6 80.0 59.4 4.1 -15.4 9.74 10.54 5.19 5.64 6.4 6.0 4.5 4.5 19.2 33.4 34.8 33.2 47.3 46.5 -60.0 20.5 15 3,963.6 3 10.3 89.2 2,507.4 32.9 82.1 . . . 116 . . . . . . . . . 11.8 3.1 1.0 2.0 0.9 20.4 11.9 73.7 -5.0 10.12 5.44 6.2 5.4 . . . 27.9 37.1 -18.2 Source: Central Bank of Oman (CBO). 11 Claims on government as a percentage of the sum of claims on government, claims on the private sector and claims on public enterprises. 21 Claims on the private sector, divided by the sum of claims on government, claims on the private sector and claims on public enterprises. 31 Total credit to private sector as a percentage of total deposits. 41 CBO estimates for 2000. 51 Provisions and reserved interest as a percentage of credit to the private sector and other domestic securities. 61 Includes claims on the private sector and on public enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX II 12. According to the CBO, total local commercial banks credit exposure to MSM securities at the end of the second quarter of 2000 was RO 217.1 million (equivalent to about 7 percent of total credit to the private sector). Banks have fully provided for the losses in the value of their own investment exposure to MSM securities, and this has reduced profitability. Profitability 13. In terms of net profits, commercial banks’ performance was disappointing in 1998-99. The growth rate of gross profits (before provisions and taxes) slowed from an unsustainable 56.4 percent in 1997 to 13.4 percent in 1998, and further to 11.3 percent in 1999. As a result of the newly introduced provisioning requirements, net profits fell by 15.4 percent in 1999, and by an estimated 5 percent in 2000, after having increased by only 4.1 percent in 1998. An obstacle to higher bank profitability in 1998 and 1999 was the need to mobilize deposits in order to conform with the amended lending ratio regulation, which required banks to net out their “borrowings from banks abroad” with “placements with banks abroad”. This led to an increase in interbank and offshore borrowing. Also, as a result of the introduction of a new rule regarding the netting concept under the revised lending ratio regulation, interest earned on placements with banks declined (this fell by 55.5 percent in 1999 on its 1998 level). 14. Overall, banks’ average return on equity declined from 22.4 percent in 1997 to 13.2 percent in 1999, and this is estimated to have remained at around that rate in 2000. Return on assets declined to 1.6 percent in 1999 from 1.9 percent in 1998, and to about 1.5 percent by the end of 2000. In Kuwait, these ratios were 15.9 percent in 1998 and 1.8 percent in 1999, respectively. Table 2. Profitability Indicators of Commercial Banks Percent Growth Rate 1998197 1999198 Net interest income Foreign exchange income Fees & commissions Gross income Operating expenses Gross profits Provisions for doubtfbl debts and decline in investments value Net profits 20.0 11.9 19.7 -4.1 8.3 2.1 13.3 7.2 13.1 2.4 13.4 11.3 80.2 94.2 4.1 -15.4 Source: Central Bank of Oman. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- APPENDIX II Liquidity 15. The loan-to-deposit ratio at the end of 1998 was 119 percent, indicating that the entire deposit base was tied up in loans.5 This rose to 122 percent in 1999 but fell to 116 percent in 2000. A difficulty with liquidity management is the mismatch between loans and deposits maturity. On average, loans to consumers tend to be for around 48 months, whereas deposits average less than 12 months. In 2000, banks began issuing three and four-year certificates of deposit (CDs), offering interest rates of around 9 percent, in an attempt to reduce their book mismatch. The introduction of such CDs should increase the level of longer-term deposits at banks. Efficiency ratios 16. Operating expense ratios indicate that they are under control, and that banks are relatively efficient. Operating expenses as a percentage of gross income declined from 45.7 percent in 1997 to 43.6 percent in 1999. Similarly, staff expenses as a percentage of gross income fell from 24.8 percent in 1997 to less than 23 percent in 1998-99. Interest rate structure 17. Given the fixed exchange rate system, interest rates in Oman tend to mirror those of the U.S. dollar, with a margin for risk premium, or CBO policy to direct domestic deposit and lending structures and size. Interest rate ceilings were in force until 1993, but now these only exist on personal loan rates. However, there is a lottery system that the banks use to attract deposits, which distorts the interest rate structure by reducing effective deposit rates. 18. The average interest rate spread between lending and deposit rates in local currency has remained fairly stable since 1998 at around 4.7 percentage points. Average spreads between 6-month LIBOR deposits and RO deposits have declined from 38 basis points in 1998 to around four basis points in 1999 but rose to 120 basis points in 2000, mirroring movements in the U.S. dollar rate over the period. 5 Deposits are more narrowly defined than in the official lending ratio. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX II Table 3. Weighted Average Annual Interest Rates (In percent) Total RO Deposits Total RO Loans FCY Deposits FCY Loans June 1997 3.851 9.166 4.162 6.933 June 1998 4.915 9.581 4.785 6.905 June 1999 5.575 10.727 3.802 6.641 June 2000 5.345 10.072 5.266 7.927 December 2000 5.455 10.060 5.274 7.980 Source: Central Bank of Oman. Foreign exchange exposure 19. Foreign currency exposure of banks is limited to a maximum of 40 percent of a bank’s net worth. Speculative exposure is not allowed--only trade-related exposure. Foreign assets of commercial banks declined from 13 percent of total assets in 1998 to 10 percent in 1999, and rose to 12 percent in 2000. Also, the ratio of foreign currency (FCY) deposits to quasi-money declined from 16 percent in 1998 to 11.6 percent in 1999 and rose marginally to 11.9 percent in 2000, in line with the movements in the interest rate spread between local and foreign currency deposits. Overall, the change in CBO regulations regarding the “netting of the due to and the due from” banks abroad, mainly resulted in a reversal of the net foreign assets position of banks form a net positive position of RO 152.6 million in 1997 to a net negative position of RO 366.9 million in 1999 and a net negative of RO 258.9 million in 2000. III. BANKING SUPERVISION AND REGULATIONS Preconditions for effective banking supervision 20. The CBO conducted a self-assessment of the supervisory system and practices in Oman in 2000, in pursuance of the need to evaluate compliance with the Core Principles as recommended by the Base1 committee. Overall, the survey indicated that the banking supervisory framework was in compliance with the Core Principles. However, in certain areas, the CBO indicated that more work is needed to comply fully with the Principles. For example, the CBO noted that it has yet to establish the necessary regulations for the supervision of banking organizations or organizations in which a bank has been formed as a holding company or as a subsidiary, on a consolidated basis. Also, the CBO has not issued any quantitative standards regarding liquidity, interest rate, operational, and market risks. However, banking supervisors must be satisfied that banks have in place a comprehensive risk management process to identify, measure, monitor and control all risks and, where appropriate, to hold capital against these risks. Banking law stipulates limits for banks to make acquisitions and investments, which are subject to supervision to evaluate the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX II possibility of loss and risk exposure. The CBO intends to acquire more expertise in the area of market risk exposure, including sophisticated VAR models. Methods of supervision and structure 21. The CBO is responsible for prudential regulation and supervision of all institutions licensed to engage in banking business, such as commercial banks, moneychangers, as well as the specialized banks and financing companies, through its Banking Supervision Department. Insurance companies are regulated through the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. The rules are clearly set out in the banking law. Banks, both local and foreign, are stipulated to provide returns on a monthly and quarterly basis for the CBO to assess their compliance. The CBO also conducts onsite inspections by its own staff and by external auditors seconded as CBO staff to do independent examinations. 22. During its onsite surveillance, the CBO examines banks’ policies, practices, and procedures related to the granting of loans, making investments and classification and provisions of their loans. Banks submit reports on on- and off-balance sheet assets and liabilities, profit and loss, capital adequacy, lending, large exposures, loan loss provisioning and deposit sources. Inclusion of data on loan classification and provisioning is also required. Local branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks are subject to similar prudential, inspection, and regulatory reporting requirements as domestic banks. The CBO has the authority to supervise the overseas activities of locally incorporated banks. Banks follow international accounting standards. 23. CBO rules are reviewed regularly and are updated in light of changing circumstances. Most important are rules relating to capital-adequacy ratios, loan-deposit ratios, accounting standards, limits to foreign currency exposure, and credit concentration ratios. Prudential regulation and requirements 24. The loan-to-deposit (or lending) ratio is set at 87.5 percent. Deposits are defined to include all customer (government and nongovernment) deposits, capital and reserves and amounts due to head offices and banks abroad. In 1998, the amounts due to banks abroad and head offices were required to be netted out of foreign assets held with banks and other institutions abroad in the form of loans and deposits, for the sake of the calculation of the lending ratio. 25. Total bank investments in bonds, notes and debentures cannot exceed 10 percent of its net worth, of which investment in any particular security should not exceed 5 percent of its net worth, and investment in securities of foreign companies is restricted to 2.5 percent of its net worth. A bank can invest up to 30 percent of its net worth in development bonds of the government of Oman. A bank’s investment in shares and securities of corporations cannot exceed 20 percent of its net worth, subject to a maximum of 5 percent of each issuer’s share capital. Investments in foreign equities or mutual funds are restricted to 5 percent of a bank’s net worth. There are no restrictions on investments in local or foreign governments’ short-term paper (Treasury bills with a maturity of 90 days or less), as long as the foreign portion is in a “freely convertible currency”. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX II 26. Other selective credit control measures are used. These include a 50 percent margin requirement on loans granted for share purchases under initial public offerings, limiting the collateral of shares to 75 percent of their market value (which is still too high). Total facilities to any one entity are limited to 15 percent of the bank’s net worth. Individual facilities to related parties (directors, management, etc.) are limited to 10 percent of net worth, and all such loans in aggregate should not exceed 35 percent of a bank’s net worth. Commercial banks are allowed to extend personal loans up to a maximum of 35 percent of their outstanding total credit. Investment in other companies requires the approval of the CBO. This can be up to 5 percent of shareholding of the company, with an aggregate total of all such investments not exceeding 20 percent of net worth. 27. The minimum reserve requirement for banks is set at 5 percent of the resource base of the commercial banks, which includes all RO and foreign currency deposits, except local interbank deposits. Reserves include cash, balances in clearing accounts at the CBO, 5 percent of the bank’s foreign currency deposits at the CBO, and Treasury bills and government bonds (subject to a maximum of 3 percent of the bank’s resource base). No interest is earned on these reserves, except for foreign currency deposits. 28. In loan classification, the CBO has stipulated that banks classify nonperforming loans as those with 90 days or above of no payment. The CBO has also imposed a limit of exposure to one single borrower or a related group of borrowers at 15 percent of a bank’s net worth. Monthly checks by the banks are supposed to monitor this limit. 29. A minimum capital of RO 20 million is required to establish a locally incorporated commercial bank, and RO 3.5 million for branches of foreign banks. A bank can lend a maximum of 25 percent of net worth, or 40 percent of total deposits into real estate. Loans in arrears for more than 90 days are classified as nonperforming. Of these, banks have to provide 25 percent, 50 percent, and 100 percent against loans classified as substandard, doubtful, and loss, respectively. For nonperforming assets for which specific provisions have not been made, 5 percent provision has to be made. 30. The CBO imposes caps on the extension of credit facilities by banks to nonresidents for operations abroad (in foreign currency): the aggregate of direct and indirect obligations shall not exceed 5 percent of the net worth of the lending bank for any non-resident individual borrower, and for all non-resident borrowers, the lending bank has to operate within a limit of 30 percent of its net worth. The banks are not allowed to extend credit to Omani nationals or expatriates for making investments abroad and accepting such instruments as a security. 31. Foreign currency borrowings limits are as follows: short-term maturity borrowings (of two years or less) are capped at 100 percent of a bank’s net worth. For medium- and long- term borrowings, the cap is up to 200 percent of net worth (for loans of 2 to 5 years) including the short-term liabilities, and for borrowings of over five years, the cap was set at 300 percent (including short -and medium-term borrowings). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX II Cross-border banking 32. The CBO has the authority to supervise (through both onsite and offsite supervision) the overseas activities of locally incorporated banks. It shares information with other supervisors through mutual arrangements (provided confidentiality is protected), and requires all foreign banks that operate in Oman to have been approved by the home country supervisor, in addition to having guarantees from head office for continuous liquidity support. Local branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks are subject to similar prudential, inspection and regulatory reporting requirements as domestic banks. The CBO also verifies banks’ policies and procedures for identification, monitoring and control of exposure to country risk in international lending and investment activities, and providing for those accordingly. 33. The banking law was updated for recent domestic and international banking and financial sector developments, and published in December 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX III III. IV. V. VI. VII. Oman: Fund Relations - (As of January 31,200l) Membership Status: Joined December 23, 1971 Accepted Article VIII, June 19, 1974 General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in fund Financial Transaction Plan transfers (net) SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Financial Arrangements: Projected Obligations to Fund: Exchange Rate Arrangement: SDR million 194.00 145.25 48.81 9.00 Percent quota 100.0 74.9 25.2 SDR million 6.26 3.12 None None None Percent allocation 100.0 49.9 The rial Omani has been pegged to the U.S. dollar since January 1986 at a rate of RO 1 = US$2.6008. The central bank maintains fixed buying/selling rates for the U.S. dollar: these are RO 1 = US$2.5975/2.6043 as of December 3 1,200O. Oman’s exchange system is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for international transactions, except for those restrictions notified to the Fund in accordance with Executive Board Decision No. 144 (52/5 1) with respect to transactions with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia-Serbia and Montenegro. VIII. Article IV Consultations: Oman is on the annual consultation cycle. The previous consultation discussions were held during April 17-30, 1999. The staff report (SM 99032) and the recent economic development (W/99/139) were discussed by the Executive Board on June 30,1999 (EBM/99/72). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX III IX. X. Technical Assistance: MAE-Bank supervision advisor MAE-Exchange arrangements and monetary policy instruments MAE-Government debt management MAE-Government debt management MAE-Monetary operations MAE-Economic policy MAE-Banking supervision FAD-Income tax system FAD-Scope for mobilization and reform of non-oil reserve sources STA-Balance of payments STA-Balance of payments Resident Representative: August 1994-December 1995 January 1995 December 1996 November 1997-November 1998 September-November 1998 April 1999-April2000 November 2000-November 2001 February-March 1997 August-September 1997 August 1993 March 200 1 None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX IV Oman: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of February 1,200O) Loan portfolio 1. The last Bank loans to Oman were in 1987, and most have since been repaid. 2. IFC holds investments of US$5.5 million in a leasing company; and of US$75 million in the United Power Corporation (the first independent power project in the Gulf). Technical cooperation l A report reviewing public expenditures in the health and education sectors was transmitted to the government in August 1994. l A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) was issued in May 1994 (Report No. 1299-OM). l In 1995, the bank provided extensive support in preparation of the Vision 2020 Conference. Some of its recommendations were incorporated in the Fifth Five-Year Development Plan (1996-2000). l In 1997, a general study was carried out on the impact of privatization on the economy, focusing on electricity and water. l In July 1999, a presentation to the Omani Ministerial Privatization Committee in Muscat was made on privatization experiences with telecommunications and electricity. l In April 2000, a study on the cost effectiveness of the health sector was sent to the government. l In early December 2000, a study on the Omani labor market, which included policy options for increasing employment of Omani nationals, was submitted. l In August 2000, a draft of a study on the cost effectiveness of the education sector was sent to the government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50- APPENDIX V Oman: Statistical Issues This appendix reviews the overall status of the statistical issues by sector, and indicates data available on Core Economic Indicators. Background 1. The coverage, quality, frequency, and timeliness of Oman’s economic data are adequate and meet the basic requirements for the surveillance, economic analysis, and policy formulation. The authorities regularly publish all data provided to the staff, except confidential information on the State Reserves Fund (SGRF) and the Oil Fund. As a framework for the plan for improvements in statistics, the authorities have decided to participate in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Metadata are being drafted. National Accounts 2. National accounts data are prepared by the Directorate General of Economic Statistics in the Ministry of National Economy (MONE) on the basis of information received from government departments and agencies and annual surveys of private and public establishments. The current national accounts series-available in current and constant 1988 prices-were last revised in 1996. Recent improvement in these data include the publication of quarterly GDP by industry at current prices and annual GDP by expenditure at constant and current prices. The authorities are currently working on improving the compliance of these data with the 1993 SNA by producing a detailed breakdown of national accounts by main sectors, such as households, private businesses, and government sector. Price Statistics 3. In May 1999, MONE started a three-year household expenditure survey that will provide a more accurate basis for compiling consumer price indices, household consumption pattern, and the value-added in some sectors, such as agriculture. The survey results would also help improve the accuracy of some of the components of the balance of payments, including foreign labor remittances and tourism. 4. In addition to the monthly consumer price index (CPI), which is currently based on surveys only in the Muscat area, MONE compiles and publishes a number of other price indices, such as the WPI, the Construction Materials Index (CMI), and the Building Cost Index (BCI). The current CPI was introduced in 1997 using weights based on a 1991 household expenditure survey. Based on the results of the ongoing household survey mentioned above, the authorities intend to introduce in the near future a new CPI that would covers, in addition to Muscat, the two largest cities in each of the county’s five regions. Moreover, following technical assistance from the Swedish Statistical Office, the authorities plan to publish a new set of price indices, including those of producers’ prices and trade. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX V Labor Statistics 5. Data on labor statistics are scant. Only regular information on civil service and public sector enterprise employment (except defense) and wages, including the breakdown between nationals and expatriates, is available. Private sector employment would become available regularly with the planned publication of the annual surveys of establishments beginning in 2001. Information on wages for Omani and non-Omani workers in the private sector by sector is available up to 1998. The authorities expect to publish in the coming months the results of a household survey that would provide up-to-date and more accurate information on wages, employment distribution, unemployment, and other labor statistics. Also, they plan to introduce a registration system for job seekers that would help monitor more closely developments in the labor market. Government Finance Statistics 6. The authorities provide an analytical presentation of the budget for the consultation process, which includes the accounts of municipalities and the regional administrations. However, the official budget presentation does not cover all the fiscal activities, as it excludes data on the operations of the public and semi-public social security funds, SGRF transactions, as well as those of the Oil Fund. There are also difficulties regarding the coverage of the official budget and reconciliation of its financing with the monetary statistics, resulting in some years in large discrepancies. Recently, however, the CBO and the Ministry of Finance have established a joint committee to reconcile these discrepancies. 7. The authorities provide comprehensive information on the government’s domestic and external debt, including by maturity and debt holders. The budget and its actual performance are published annually with detailed. Actual government statistics are also published in the Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. The public is provided with projected fiscal activity of the central government through the 5-year development plans. Monetary and Financial Statistics 8. Consistent monthly monetary data on the Central Bank, the deposit money banks and other financial institutions are published in the Bulletin ofthe Central Bank, usually with a short lag. Monthly monetary and financial data are reported to STA on regular basis. The Muscat stock market index is provided in the Muscat Securities Market’s (MSM) website on a daily basis. Balance of Payments and External Debt Statistics 9. Data for most balance of payments entries are reliable, though in terms of classification, they are not yet published in full conformity with the fifth edition Balance of Payments (BOP) manual. For instance, imports are still compiled on a C.I.F. basis. Financial accounts transactions, particularly of the private sector, are partial, resulting in some years in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX V large movements in errors and omissions and unclassified capitalmovements. Owing to the increased importance of the tourism sector, the authorities have recently started to conduct regular surveys on tourism to determine the flows associated with this activity. Published information on the country’s external debt only includes that of the central government’s, but data on the nongovernment external’s debt are provided to the staff during consultations. Publication of Oman’s international reserves was recently revised in conformity with the fifth BOP edition. Data on the balance of payments are also published in the Fund’s Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicOman: Core Statistical Indicators As of end-February 2001 Date of Latest Observation Central Overall htema- B& Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- Exchange tional Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account ment GDP External Debt Rates Reserves Sheet Money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance (nominal) Debt Service 02/o 1 12/00 12100 12100 12100 12/00 08/00 09100 09/00 1 1100 09100 woo 12/00 Date Received I/ 02101 02/O 1 02/o 1 02/o 1 02101 02/01 Ol/Ol 02/o 1 OUOl 02/01 02/o 1 02101 02/o 1 Frequency D M M M M M M M Q M Q M M of Data Frequency M M M M M M M M Q Q Q Q Q of Reporting Source of Update Central Bank of Oman KBQ CBO CBO CBO CBO CBO Ministry of National Economy (MONE) MONE CBO MONE MONE CBO and Joint BIS- IMF- World Bank MONE and CBO Mode of Reporting Confi- dentiality 41 STA STA Reports Reports QSB 21 QSB 21 ME1 31 ME1 31 U U STA Reports QSB 21 MEI 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U STA Reports QSB 21 MEI 31 U Joint BIS- IMF- World Bank U STA Reports QSB 21 ME1 31 U Frequency M M M M M M M M Q M Q A A of publication II Or disseminated through the Internet. 21 QSB stands for Quarterly Statistical Bulletin. 31 ME1 stands for Main Economic Indicators. 41 U stands for Unrestricted. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public