DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR l-----l AGENDA I I SM/02/307 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION October I,2002 To: Members of Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Myanmar-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Myanmar, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, October 23,2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Myanmar indicating that they do not consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Prasad, RES (ext. 38493) and Ms. Kongsamut, APD (ext. 34541). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, October 9, 2002; and to the Asian Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MYANMAR Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Myanmar Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Michael T. Hadjimichael September 30, 2002 a The 2002 Article IV consultation discussions took place during July 4-16, 2002. The staff team met with Governor of the Central Bank of Myanmar, U Kyaw Kyaw Maung; Minister of the Office of the Chairman of the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), Brig. Gen. David 0. Abel; and with other senior officials and private sector representatives. 0 The staff team comprised Mr. Prasad (RES, head), Ms. Kongsamut, Mr. Zebregs (both APD), and Mr. Ilahi (PDR). Mr. Elson (APD) participated in the discussions on July 4-5. The team was accompanied by staff of the World Bank (Mr. Ghani) and the Asian Development Bank (Mr. Harrigan). Mr. Djojosubroto and Ms. 00 (both OED) attended the policy meetings. . During the last Article IV consultation concluded on December 4, 2000, Directors expressed deep concern about the medium-term outlook for the country. They considered the stance of macroeconomic and structural policies to be unsustainable, and urged a fundamental and comprehensive reorientation of policies. Priority reforms included exchange rate unification and a reallocation of defense spending toward the long-neglected social sector. More generally, they urged the authorities to reduce government intervention, liberalize the economy, and improve governance in order to enhance medium-term growth prospects. 0 Effective surveillance is severely hampered by the lack of timely and reliable statistical data. The data suffer from serious shortcomings in quality and coverage, and are subject to long reporting lags and inconsistencies. Official and independent estimates of key macroeconomic variables differ significantly. In addition, scant data is provided between consultations. . Myanmar continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, although it has eliminated all Article XIV restrictions. Myanmar maintains exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices subject to Article VIII jurisdiction. 0 The authorities have not consented to publish the staff report or a Public Information Notice. l The principal authors of this report are Ms. Kongsamut and Mr. Prasad. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary.. . _. 3 I. Background 4 II. Recent Developments and Near-term Outlook _. _. _, _. 8 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 11 A. Macroeconomic Policies ..................................................................................... 11 B. Structural Policies and Other Issues ..................................................................... 14 C. Medium Term Prospects ..................................................................................... 17 IV. Staff Appraisal .._,______._....,................................_.._._.,.,,.....,...................................,.,...,.. 18 Text Boxes 1. How Does Myanmar Compare With the Other East Asian Countries on the Millennium Development Goals?. _. _. _. _. _. 5 2. Myanmar’s Relations with the International Community.. _. _. 7 3. Options for Exchange Rate Unification _. _. _. _. _. _. 14 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 199 l/92-200 l/02.. 2 1 2. Selected External Indicators, 199 l/92-200 l/O2 22 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2002/03 ...................................................... 23 2. Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector, 1999/00-2002/03 .............. .24 3. Balance of Payments, 1997/98-2002/03 ................................................................... 26 4. External Debt and Arrears, 1997/98-2001/02 ........................................................... 27 5. Monetary Authorities’ Accounts and Monetary Survey, 19982001 ......................... 28 6. Medium-Term Scenario, 1999/00-2006/07 ............................................................... 29 7. Policy Reform Scenario, 1999/00-2006/07 ............................................................... 30 Annexes I. Social Indicators ...................................................................................................... 3 1 II. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... 32 III. Fund Relations ......................................................................................................... 36 IV. Relations with the World Bank Group ..................................................................... 38 V. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ............................................................ 39 VI. Changes in the Exchange and Trade System. ............................................................ 40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Developments a The macroeconomic situation has deteriorated in many respects. Growth has been robust according to official figures, although doubts persist regarding the reliability of these data. The fiscal deficit spiked in 2000/01, and, despite a subsequent decline in 2001/02, remains unsustainably high. Central bank financing of the deficit has produced a surge in inflation and a sharp depreciation of the parallel market exchange rate. The external position remains precarious, with low import cover of reserves and continuing arrears accumulation. Policy Issues 0 Fiscal reforms and exchange rate unification remain the principal macroeconomic policy priorities. Expenditure reorientation toward social priorities and revenue mobilization are needed to support spending on development needs. Exchange rate unification would remove a principal economic distortion and, if undertaken in conjunction with fiscal reform and other structural measures, would help set the stage for sustained and equitable non-inflationary growth. a Structural reforms are needed to improve growth prospects and to support fiscal and exchange system reforms by mitigating their potentially disruptive short-term effects. Priorities include rationalizing and privatizing the State Economic Enterprises (SEES), and revising agricultural procurement and export policies. SEES remain a considerable burden on the budget; the government’s privatization efforts have made only limited progress, Liberalizing private sector rice exports would induce a supply and export response which could boost growth and help finance increased imports of necessary inputs. 0 While comprehensive reforms are required, an incremental approach to reform can be justified in view of the financing constraints and limited institutional capacity. This approach could only be effective, however, if it were executed within the framework of a well-defined medium-term strategy. The proposed mutually complementary modest steps do not require external financing, should yield significant benefits, and could build momentum for deeper reforms. Four such steps are: (i) beginning exchange rate unification by gradually shifting SEE operations to the parallel foreign exchange market; (ii) removing restrictions on private exports of high quality rice; (iii) enhancing revenue collections within the existing tax structure; and (iv) replacing implicit taxes and subsidies, such as the rice procurement system, with more explicit counterparts. 0 Improvements in the collection and dissemination of economic statistics are crucial for informed policy-making and for effectively communicating and implementing the reform agenda. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUND 1. Myanmar has substantial, but unrealized, economic potential. The country’s abundant natural resources hold vast potential in agriculture, as well as more modest prospects in oil and gas. Tourism also holds great promise. Other possible growth sectors that could be internationally competitive include agro-processing and low-skilled manufacturing. 2. Despite such potential, economic mismanagement has contributed to living standards that lag far behind those of other countries in the region. The lack of fiscal discipline has engendered severe macroeconomic instability. The very low and declining revenue ratio, and spending allocations that consistently prioritize defense rather than social expenditures, have resulted in widespread poverty and weak levels of human development indicators (Box 1). r Comparative measures suggest that Myanmar scores very low on governance, particularly on institutional strength.2 The deterioration in institutional infrastructure and various aspects of human capital continues to erode Myanmar’s potential. In addition, pricing and procurement policies, such as the dual exchange rate system and the rice procurement system, have created large distortions in the economy.3 4 3. In the absence of comprehensive macroeconomic and structural reforms, the medium-term outlook remains bleak. In particular, prospects for sustained and equitable growth with low and stable inflation are likely to remain out of reach under current policies, ’ Defense spending (officially recorded) accounts for about one quarter of total budget expenditures, while spending on health and education accounts for only one sixth. See Chapter 3 of the Selected Issues paper for a cross-country comparison. 2 The International Country Risk Guide rates Myanmar poorly in terms of institutional strength, including measures for law and order, freedom from corruption, democratic accountability, and bureaucratic quality. Myanmar’s rating of institutional strength declined to 1.38 in 2001 from 2.35 in 1995, relative to a maximum possible score of 6 (in 2001, the average score for developing countries was 2.56, while the ASEAN average was 3.38). See the Annex to Chapter 1 of the Selected Issues paper. 3 The official exchange rate, pegged to the SDR, is about Kyats 7 per U.S. dollar. It applies to transactions undertaken by the central government and the state economic enterprises. Private sector transactions take place at the substantially more depreciated parallel market Foreign Exchange Certificate (FEC) rate. 4 An elaboration of the costs of the dual exchange rate system and the rice procurement system can be found in Chapters 1 and 2 of the accompanying Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1: HOW DOES MYANMAR COMPARE WITH THE OTHER EAST ASIAN COUNTRIES ON THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS? The Millennium Development Goals, as agreed by the international community, are to reduce poverty and infant mortality rates, improve access to education, promote gender equality, combat the prevalence of major diseases, and ensure environmental sustainability. How is Myanmar poised to achieve the Millennium Development Goals? How does it compare with the rest of East Asia? Official data do not exist on Myanmar to answer the above questions with a high degree of confidence. Nevertheless, there is evidence to suggest that Myanmar is largely “off track’ and continues to fall far behind the other East Asian countries on the Millennium Development Goals (Annex I), The Human Development Report 2002, for example, ranked Myanmar 127 out of a group of 173 countries on the Human Development Index, substantially behind the other ASEAN countries. Reducing poverty and hunger: According to the 1997 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, the latest available one, nearly 23 percent of the population lives on less than 2400 calories a day. Although the poverty numbers for Myanmar are not comparable, they are significantly higher than the East Asia and Pacific Region average of 15 percent in 1999 (less than $l-a-day). Child malnutrition is acute, and represents the “silent emergency” in Myanmar - 36 percent of children under the age of five (UNICEF, 2000) are malnourished compared to an average of 10 percent for East Asia. Achieving universal education: Myanmar culture places a high value on %lrce: WJ an3”N’CEF education. Yet, the net primary enrollment rate was 80 percent in 1997 which is below the average of 91 percent for East Asia. Of every 100 children who begin primary school, only 34 complete the five-year cycle. The secondary Public Spending on Education (% of GDP) Source: World Bank, 1999 enrollment rate of 34 percent for Myanmar compares with 55 percent fox Thailand and 49 percent for Vietnam. Myanmar devotes less than 1 percent 01 GDP to public expenditure on education. Public expenditure on education. health and social development programs has been crowded out by the high level of expenditure on defense which accounts for about 25 percent of tota! government expenditure. Promoting gender equality: There is considerable gender equity ir Myanmar. The ratio of net primary school enrollment for females is close tc that for males. The ratio of young literate females to males is 88 percent foi Myanmar, compared with an average of 98 percent for the East Asia region. lnlant and “ndsr-5 Mortality Rates (per t,OO(1 live births) 150 _..._....,..._.__.................................................... Reducing child mortality: Myanmar is far behind other Asian countries in reducing under-five and infant mortality rates. The under- five mortality rate (per 1000) is very high at 139 compared with 48 for East Asia; the infant mortality rate is at 79 (per 1000) compared with 40 for East Asia, Maternal mortality rates are also high. Public expenditure on health is less than half a percentage point of GDP, well below the average of about 2.3 percent in East Asia. I ~~lnfsnt Morlslily Rate =Under-5 Mortality Rate 1 source: WDI. Combating HIV/AIDS and malaria: The major public health concerns in Myanmar are malaria, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and leprosy. Malaria is the most prevalent disease ir terms of mortality and morbidity. Almost half a million people have HIV/AIDS, with an adult infection rate ol almost 1.8 percent. Ensuring environmental sustainability: Annual deforestation rates have doubled since the late 1980s mainly because of population growth, inappropriate land use, lack of clarity on land ownership rights, lack of proper lane titling, poor forest tenure policies and lack of alternative fuels. Data from the Food and Agriculture Organizatior (FAO) suggest that only 40 percent of the total land area remains under forest cover today. Prepared by World Bank Staff. Sources: World Bank Report (1999), World Development Indicators (2001), East Asia Update (ZOOZ), Human Development Report 2002. FAC (1999). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Macroeconomic reforms that top the agenda include fiscal reforms and exchange rate unification, with agriculture and State Economic Enterprise (SEE) reform leading the structural agenda. 5 4. The main policy recommendations of previous missions have remained largely unimplemented. The need for comprehensive reforms has been the theme of Article IV consultation discussions with Myanmar in recent years. The authorities generally agreed in principle with the broad outlines of the staffs advice, but referred to problems of implementation, and seemed unable to commit to a concrete reform plan without assurances of foreign financial assistance. Partly as a result of this inaction, the staff has suggested a more gradual, second-best approach to reform with a view to persuading the authorities to initiate at least limited steps towards reform. 5. Given the financing constraints and limited institutional capacity, an incremental approach could he used to generate momentum for the reform process, and help set the stage for obtaining international support over the medium-term. A set of more modest, but concrete short-term policy actions, implemented within the framework of a well-articulated medium-term strategy, would help minimize the risk of social disruption and build momentum for fundamental reforms. These modest steps, outlined in detail below, would be mutually complementary and not require external financing. Such actions would demonstrate the authorities’ commitment to reform and help Myanmar re-engage fruitfully with the international community (Box 2). They would also pave the way towards resumption of technical assistance from the Fund.6 5 SEES accounted for 21 percent of aggregate output in 2000/01. Exports of rice, petroleum, natural gas, teak, and many precious stones and metals are handled solely by the state; the public sector’s share of total exports, which had previously been around 30 percent, rose to 47 percent in 2001/02 due to gas exports. Imports by the public sector were 35 percent of total imports in 2001/02, compared with an average of 28 percent in previous years. 6 During the 1998 Article IV consultation, Directors hesitated to support continued Fund technical assistance, noting that decisions on the provision of future TA would need to be supported by a strong record of implementation of past recommendations. In view of Myanmar’s weak record of implementation, and the recent Fund-wide prioritization of TA activities, Myanmar has not received technical assistance since 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box2: MYANMAR'SRELATIONSWITHTHJCINTERNATIONALCOMMUNITY Background to the political and economic isolation of Myanmar. The National League for Democracy (NLD) party, headed by Aung San Suu Kyi, won a decisive victory in the 1990 elections, but has since been kept from power by the military government. In response to the failure of the regime to cede power to a democratically elected civilian government, and in growing concern at human rights violations by the military, the international community has imposed economic sanctions against the regime. Bilateral aid from the major donors has virtually ceased. The United States, European Union, and Canada have withdrawn general system of preferences (GSP) privileges, and other restrictions (including on private investment) have been imposed. In addition, well-organized consumer boycott campaigns in North America and Europe have been effective in persuading tourists to stay away and many international firms to withdraw. These measures have been endorsed by the NLD, which views any economic support as merely perpetuating the current regime. In recent years, Myanmar has cautiously sought to re-engage the international community, beginning with its accession to ASEAN (the Association of South-East Asian Nations) in 1997. Relations with international financial institutions have been at a minimal level. The opposition of the major shareholders, coupled with unpaid arrears, have resulted in Myanmar losing access to financial and other forms of assistance from the World Bank and the AsDB. The IMF has continued to hold regular Article IV consultations, but has curtailed technical assistance. The secret negotiations (mediated by U.N. Special Envoy Ismail Razali) which culminated in the May 2002 release of Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest have focused the international community’s attention on the country once again. Over the past year, Myanmar has received delegations from the International Labour Organization (to investigate forced labor practices), the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, and the European Union. The AsDB and the World Bank are continuing to update their knowledge base of the country. To consider its response to the release of Aung San Suu Kyi, the United Nations convened a meeting of its Informal Consultative Group on Myanmar (ICGM) in May. At this meeting, representatives of national governments expressed cautious optimism about recent political developments and called for further tangible evidence of “irreversible commitment to political change.” Their concern over the deteriorating economic and social conditions in the country has prompted them to resume limited humanitarian assistance. The NLD has indicated support for the resumption of well-monitored, limited, humanitarian assistance delivered by the U.N. and NGOs. Donors also support setting up a U.N. office in Yangon to coordinate aid flows and monitor economic and political developments. At the ICGM meeting, donors agreed that the government should be encouraged to undertake economic reforms alongside political reforms. They expressed a desire to coordinate the international community’s message about required economic reforms in Myanmar based upon the findings and recommendations of the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- II. RECENTDEVELOPMENTSANDNEAR-TERMOUTLOOK Economic analysis is severely hampered by the lack of timely and reliable statistical data. 7 Nevertheless, official estimates indicate continued rapid GDP growth, although other indicators of economic activity appear less robust. Reflecting large macroeconomic imbalances, particularly on the fiscal front, inflation has surged and the parallel market Foreign Exchange Certificate (FEC) rate has depreciated sharply over the past year. 6. Offkial figures indicate that growth remained strong in 2001/02.* GDP grew by 10% percent in 2001/02, maintaining its double-digit record of growth as a result of continued strong agricultural performance (Table 1, Chart 1). The favorable developments in the primary sector in turn spurred growth in other sectors, including agro-processing activities in manufacturing, and services and trade activities. Increases in exports of gas and other agricultural commodities have boosted the level of overall exports in the last two years. 7. However, other indicators of economic activity cast doubt on these favorable figures.’ For instance, alternative indicators related to the agriculture sector are far weaker. After two years of steady growth, yields of the staple rice crop fell, and imports and domestic production of fertilizers also declined by 50-75 percent each in 2001/02. In addition, cement production fell by almost 10 percent during this period. lo Press reports and anecdotal evidence suggest a continuing pull-out of foreign firms. 8. The fiscal position has improved since 2000/01, but remains a significant cause for concern. Fiscal slippages from budgeted targets are the norm; the overall public sector deficit has been exacerbated by the five-fold public sector wage increase in 2000, continuing weak SEE performance, and repeated overruns in capital expenditures (Table 2). l1 Reflecting weak budgetary controls, the estimated deficit for 2001/02 was more than double its original target of 7 Besides the long reporting lags and inconsistencies in the accounts, severe valuation problems exist due to the dual exchange rate system. ’ Fiscal year beginning April 1, 9 The informal sector is believed to be sizeable, although the level of activity in the sector is difficult to gauge. lo Power generation is reported to have increased by over 10 percent in 2001/02, though power shortages are frequent and anecdotal evidence suggests the increasing use of private generators to maintain a stable power supply. See Chapter 1 in the Selected Issues paper. l1 While the wage increase seems very large, wage levels in the public sector are still extremely low. They are supplemented by other non-wage benefits, such as subsidies for rice and transportation, provided to public sector employees. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 2 percent of GDP, though it had fallen significantly from the previous year’s deficit of 8.3 percent of GDP. This decline largely reflects reductions in both capital and current expenditure. The budget for 2002/03 envisages a further decline in the deficit, but past experience suggests this target is unlikely to be achieved. Revenues have not kept pace with the rate of overall growth, and, at around 4 percent of GDP, remain very low by international standards. l2 Meanwhile, since 1999/2000, estimated total public sector debt (including external debt) has increased by over 15 percentage points to reach 102 percent of GDP in 2001/02. 9. Reflecting the lagged effects of the fiscal imbalances, inflation has surged and the parallel market Foreign Exchange Certificate (FEC) rate has depreciated sharply over the past year. As private banks’ demand for government paper has declined, financing requirements of the public sector have increasingly been covered by central bank financing. This development, in combination with the spike in the fiscal deficit in 2000/01, has led to a surge in inflation over the past year. The consumer price index rose by close to 60 percent over the year to April 2002, with prices for some essential commodities such as cooking 70 I , 9001 hflationand the FEC rate, 2000-02 60 800 50 FECrate(right axis). 700 40 600 30 500 20 400 10 300 0 200 10 100 Inflat~on(lcftaxis).y/ypcrccnl change 20 May- Sep- Ian- May- Sep- Jan- 00 00 01 01 01 02 oil more than doubling during this period. Reflecting the same factors underlying the surge in inflation, the FEC rate has depreciated sharply and reached K 906 per U.S. dollar in August 2002. 10. The authorities responded to the sharp movements in inflation and the exchange rate by imposing even more restrictive administrative measures. High inflation, and expectations of continued high inflation, have prompted flight from kyat-denominated financial assets into real assets, including gold, and hard currency. l3 In mid-2002, the authorities disallowed banks’ acceptance of gold as collateral for personal loans, as they believed that this practice was fueling the rise in gold prices. In spring 2002, the authorities suspended the issuance of export licenses to foreign traders, based on their view that the traders were involved in speculative activity against the currency. This latter restriction is expected to have a severe impact on the export of pulses and beans, an area of considerable private sector dynamism in recent years. l4 l2 For more details on the composition of government revenue and expenditure, and a cross- country comparison, see Chapter 3 of the Selected Issues paper. l3 Real estate prices were also said to be increasing. I4 The export of pulses and beans, mainly to India and Bangladesh, was conducted mostly by foreign merchants with extensive overseas distribution networks, which domestic traders lack. As the largest agricultural export product, pulses and beans accounted for around 18 percent of non- gas exports in 2001/02. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Other extensive exchange controls are in place, including two priority import lists, which impose broad restrictions on goods that can be imported (Annex VI). 11. The external position remains precarious; medium-term vulnerability is also of serious concern. The current account deteriorated from a small surplus in 2000/01 to a deficit of 7 percent of GDP in 2001/02 (Chart 2, Table 3).15 Export growth, which was exceptionally strong in 2000/O 1 due to gas exports, turned negative the following year. l6 Tourism earnings and private remittances have steadily declined in recent years, while public sector imports rose sharply in 200 l/02, financed by the increase in gas export receipts from the previous year. Capital inflows (both private and public) have virtually ceased, reflecting the effects of international sanctions and negative perceptions of international investors regarding Myanmar’s medium-term macroeconomic prospects. As a result, despite some augmentation of gross reserves through a regional swap facility with Malaysia, the official reserve position remains weak, covering less than 2% months of imports. Non-borrowed reserves provide even less import cover. l7 External arrears continue to accumulate and currently exceed $2.5 billion. Public external debt remains high (at 79 percent of GDP), with over a third of this debt in arrears (Table 4). 12. Deposit and credit growth have slowed. Until recently, credit growth had been strong, driven partly by the financing requirements of the public sector, as well as the continued low interest rate policy (Table 5)” Private sector credit also experienced very strong growth in the l5 For the current account balance and external debt ratios to GDP, the staff has converted official estimates of output into U.S. dollars using a weighted average of the FEC (70 percent) and the official exchange rates (30 percent), reflecting the historic weights of the public sector’s share in total trade. l6 Most of the gas exports go to Thailand; the agreement on gas provision under a take-or-pay contract (involving a consortium of multinational companies) was to take effect in 1998, but low demand kept Thailand from beginning to take delivery until 2000/01. Now that the project has come on stream with a stable supply, there is little prospect for further growth in the near term. In addition, the net intlow of foreign exchange to Myanmar is a relatively small fraction of the gas exports, as most of the proceeds go towards profit repatriation by the foreign partners and loan repayments. l7 The counterparty to the $200 million 6-month swap arrangement is Bank Negara Malaysia. Such 3-6 month swap arrangements have been availed of intermittently since 1997, and have carried an interest rate of around 5-6 percent. ‘* The central bank’s discount rate (policy rate) has been set at 10 percent since mid-2000. Commercial banks are required to set deposit and lending rates within a fixed spread of the central bank policy rate. All commercial banks are currently operating at the respective ceilings of the deposit (10 percent) and lending (15 percent) rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- range of 50-60 percent (year-year) since early 2001, with the new loans going mainly to the trade and manufacturing sectors. However, credit growth has slowed, and has recently turned negative in real terms as inflation has risen. Deposit growth, though slowing, is still strong in nominal terms. 13. On present policies, the immediate outlook for 2002/03 is not favorable. Growth is expected to slow, hindered by the cumulative impact of past policies (Table 6).” Inflation is likely to remain high, as the lagged effects of fiscal imbalances continue to be felt and the prospects for a lower deficit are slim. The external position is not expected to improve significantly, as the export boom of 2000/01 was largely driven by the coming-on-stream of gas exports, pulses and beans exports are likely to be adversely affected by the administrative measures, and capital inflows are likely to remain at minimal levels. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS The policy discussions focused on the key macroeconomic and structural reforms needed to stabilize the economy andpromote sustainable growth. Fiscal reforms and exchange rate untfication are the key macroeconomic policy priorities. Structural reforms are needed to improve growth prospects and to support macroeconomic reforms by mitigating their potentially disruptive short-term effects. Reforms of state economic enterprises and the agricultural procurement and export policies should lead the structural reform agenda. Improvements in the collection and dissemination of economic statistics are crucial for informed policy-making and for effectively communicating and implementing the reform agenda. A. Macroeconomic Policies 14. The staff emphasized that fiscal discipline is a prerequisite for macroeconomic stability. The effects of large fiscal deficits, financed largely by borrowing from the central bank, are evident in rising inflation and the sharp depreciation of the FEC rate. Unless better control of the fiscal position can be achieved, macroeconomic stability will remain an elusive goal. The authorities concurred that lower deficits could reduce inflationary pressures, but also noted that, in their view, the recent surge in inflation was caused by excessive exchange rate depreciation, which in turn was driven by speculative activity. 15. The authorities announced their intention to balance the budget in the next three to five years, but have yet to define a strategy or the measures needed to achieve this objective. The staff welcomed this expression of intent, but noted that a well-articulated medium- term strategy is essential for making progress towards this goal, and cautioned that any attempts to move toward budget balance by reducing already low social expenditures could have serious negative repercussions. In addition, the recurring substantial overruns in expenditure highlight the lg In addition, the recent floods may reduce agricultural output significantly. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- need for better controls in the budgetary process. Replacing implicit taxes and subsidies-including the rice procurement policy and the cross-subsidization of SEES via the dual exchange rate system-with more explicit counterparts would also greatly facilitate this process. 16. Both the expenditure and revenue structures of the government finances are in urgent need of reform in order to support the country’s development needs. Government expenditures should be shified away from defense activities and subsidies to the state enterprise sector, and redirected toward restoring the country’s physical and social infrastructure through well-targeted spending on health, education, and economically sound capital projects.20 The authorities noted that infrastructure spending had become a priority, and that a number of new bridges and dams were being built to promote development. The staff observed that necessary maintenance expenditures had suffered from the priority placed on building new structures, and emphasized the importance of undertaking infrastructure expenditures in the context of a well- defined and integrated strategy for the provision of such services. The authorities acknowledged that maintenance expenditures had been insufficient in some areas. 17. To complement this reorientation of expenditures, a stronger revenue effort is required. The staff argued that this could be partially achieved even within the context of the present tax structure. The authorities agreed that continued efforts to improve tax compliance and eliminate various exemptions and loopholes have the potential to raise revenues by lo- 15 percent in the short-term. The staff noted that additional steps such as the valuation of imports at market exchange rates would improve revenues and would also enhance the transparency of the fiscal system. Over the medium term, measures to broaden the tax base and simplify the tax structure are needed. For example, the agricultural sector could be drawn into the tax system by extending the income tax to agricultural producers, while removing the implicit taxes and subsidies on this sector. In addition, a value added tax would render the tax structure more transparent, and could have beneficial growth effects. The authorities agreed on the merits of such a tax, but noted that its adoption may not be feasible in the short term. 18. Unification of the exchange rate is a policy priority. The dual exchange rate system has distorted relative prices, adversely affected investment and production decisions, provided incentives for corruption, and imposed serious costs on the economy. The staff reiterated the fundamental importance of unifying the exchange rate to correct economic distortions and improve resource allocation. Given the low level of reserves, the current system should be replaced by a more flexible unified exchange rate system. The authorities agreed that unification was a desirable objective, but were concerned about possible adverse effects on inflation and the potential for social disruption. They also expressed the need to have guaranteed external financing to stabilize the exchange rate following unification. 2o The authorities noted that military expenditures as currently classified also included some social expenditures, especially in the border areas. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - 19. Various options for exchange rate unification were discussed, with a first step towards gradual unification proposed. Previous missions had presented a number of options, ranging from a one-shot unification to more gradual approaches (Box 3). Following in these footsteps, the staff defined a strategy which aimed to shifi SEE foreign exchange transactions gradually onto the market exchange rate: importing and exporting enterprises would be sequentially matched based on the volume of their foreign exchange transactions. Such an approach would have relatively limited destabilizing effects on either the foreign exchange market or on public finances in the short-run, and would not require external financing. The authorities responded positively to this proposal. The staff added that, in order to make the process smoother and to enhance confidence-building effects, the authorities would need to provide a clear statement about their intention to fully unify the exchange rate over a specified time period of, say, one to two years. 20. The short-run costs of exchange rate unification can be mitigated if undertaken in tandem with a broader set of reforms. The staff acknowledged the authorities’ concern about pass-through effects on inflation following exchange rate unification, but argued that implementation of gradual exchange rate unification, along with fiscal and structural reform measures (as outlined below), could help alleviate these effects. Structural reform measures would induce a positive supply response even in the short run, and would raise the long-run growth potential of the economy. Furthermore, progress towards unification, if coupled with fiscal and other reforms, would send a strong signal to the international community about the seriousness of the reform effort, and could help to reverse the decline in capital inflows. Such inflows would help reduce the pressure on the unified exchange rate and, thus, domestic prices, and possibly even enable some accumulation of reserves to a more comfortable level. 21. Operational autonomy of the central bank is required for monetary policy to contribute effectively to macroeconomic stability. While an independent central bank would best serve Myamnar’s interests in the long run, the staff indicated that a more appropriate short- term goal is to eliminate automatic financing of the deficit by the central bank. Another measure which would increase the efliciency of the financial sector is to relax interest rate controls to promote a better allocation of resources. The authorities noted that their low interest rate policy had been geared toward encouraging industrial development, and that they would be reluctant to undertake interest rate liberalization if it could result in high interest rates. The staff suggested that, rather than removing controls all at once, interest rates could be gradually liberalized once the economy has been stabilized. A first step could be to increase the margins by which deposit and lending rates are allowed to exceed the central bank discount rate. The authorities also noted that low interest rates had not deterred deposit growth. The staff responded that, although the effects may not yet be apparent, real interest rates that are persistently negative could hinder financial intermediation in the future by discouraging savings. In addition, artificially low interest rates provide an implicit subsidy to borrowers and help keep inefficient enterprises afloat. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- I Box 3. OPTIONS FOR EXCHANGE RATE UNIFICATION Myanmar currently has a dual exchange rate regime consisting of a pegged official rate and a parallel market-determined Foreign Exchange Certificate (FEC) rate. The official exchange rate applies to transactions undertaken by the central government and state economic enterprises (SEES). ln previous years the share of transactions covered by the official exchange rate had fallen to around 30 percent, with the remainder conducted at FEC rates. In 2001102, the increase in gas exports and an unusually strong year for rice exports lifted the share of public sector exports transacted at the official exchange rate to 47 percent of total exports, and the consequent loosening of the foreign exchange constraint also boosted the share of public sector imports to 35 percent of total imports. ln earlier missions, the staff had presented the following options for achieving exchange rate unification: 0 The “big bang” approach. Starting from a certain date, all transactions currently covered by the official exchange rate would be conducted at the market-determined FEC rate. To cushion such a move, this approach could also involve an explicit system of taxes and subsidies (included in the budget) to offset the financial impact of unification on SEE operations. These taxes and subsidies would then be withdrawn gradually to allow SEES time to adjust. a Unification bv transaction. Under this approach, the official rate would be gradually phased out by narrowing the class of transactions to which it applied. . Unification bv enterprise. SEES would be selectively removed from the official foreign exchange budget as part of a program of enterprise reform, with care taken to minimize the effect on the market exchange rate and on the fiscal position by matching importing and exporting SEES according to their overall transactions in foreign exchange. . Au alternative aunroach is to gradually devalue the official exchange rate (according to a pre- announced schedule) at which all public sector transactions are conducted, until the official exchange rate is fully aligned with the FEC rate. B. Structural Policies and Other Issues 22. Reforms of the State Economic Enterprises should top the structural agenda. There was agreement between the staff and the authorities that the sizeable drain on the budget of the state enterprise sector necessitates broad reforms of this sector. The measures outlined in the previous section, including making explicit the taxes on and subsidies provided to SEES, along with gradual unification of the exchange rate, would help the authorities move towards this goal.21 21 In addition, the true extent of the outstanding stock of suppliers’ credits to SEES should be appropriately classified, with disbursements and increases in debt recorded at the time of disbursement, rather than at the time of repayment as is currently the case. Though some SEES do record these transactions appropriately, these practices are not uniform across SEES. As a result, public external debt is currently estimated to be understated by $200-300 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Once the true financial position of these enterprises is clear, they can be reformed to operate on a more commercial basis and, ultimately, should be privatized. The authorities agreed that the SEE financial positions were currently distorted and noted that they had already begun to calculate the correct financial position of some SEES (based on the market exchange rate rather than the official rate). They also observed that some progress had been made in privatization, but the staff noted that the public sector has also expanded into new commercial activities, calling into question the authorities’ commitment to private-sector led growth. 23. Changes in agricultural export policies could boost production and export earnings. The procurement system, the virtual ban on private exports of rice, as well as the shortages of essential inputs due to foreign exchange constraints, have kept rice output depressed relative to potential, and have dampened the incentives for producing rice for export. The staffs view was that liberalizing this sector could yield significant increases in the supply of rice, especially since more rice exports would provide foreign exchange earnings for imports of fertilizers and other inputs. The authorities were reluctant to undertake such reforms in this sector, noting that rice is a staple crop. Their main concern was that allowing exports of rice could lead to a diversion of rice from the domestic market, sharp increases in domestic rice prices, and social disruption. The authorities noted that some incentives are already in place for private sector exports of rice; some farms can export up to half of their rice output.22 24. The experiences of other countries in the region that have liberalized the exports of staple commodities such as rice demonstrate the benetits of such reforms. The staff recognized the authorities’ concern that allowing private sector rice exports could lead to an increase in the domestic price of rice, with adverse effects on the poor. The authorities explained that maintaining a stable supply of lower-quality rice was essential, as such rice was favored by domestic consumers. To allay these concerns, the staff suggested that an intermediate approach could be to allow private exports of only higher-quality rice.23 In fact, evidence from other agrarian economies indicates that increases in production in response to more favorable incentives would broaden the potential tax base and could generate significant increases in revenues. If necessary, such revenues could then be used to explicitly subsidize the provision of lower-quality rice that is consumed by the poor. The staff noted that the successful experience of countries such as Vietnam demonstrate the strong and rapid supply response from adoption of such policies, 22 Only large farms located on restored, cultivable wasteland are allowed to export up to fifty percent of their output. However, no rice exports have so far resulted from this selective liberalization. 23 High-quality rice currently accounts for around 6 percent of rice production and is in greater demand in export markets. Even if the incentives were altered, constraints on inputs and land quality would limit the scope for farmers to immediately switch to the production of only high- quality rice. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Myanmar’s own experience of rapid growth in output and exports of pulses and beans in response to their liberalization also attests to these effects, 25. Ad hoc administrative measures significantly hamper trade. The authorities observed that Myanmar has undertaken tariff reform since 1999.24 However, the staff noted that increasingly stringent administrative measures such as the priority import lists render tariff levels almost meaningless as they act as a significant restraint on trade, run counter to the principle of free trade to which Myamnar has committed itself in international fora, and feed into corruption. Since the authorities’ need for the restrictive measures ultimately stems from the dual exchange rate system, reforms in this area should ideally be undertaken in conjunction with other reforms, including exchange rate unification. Myanmar continues to maintain exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices subject to Fund approval under Article VIII.25 26. Sound development of the financial sector will require continued effective supervision. Previous missions had recommended a level playing field in terms of the enforcement of prudential regulations between private and public banks. The staff acknowledged that some progress had been made in improving prudential supervision for both public and private banks. However, although the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio for private banks appears manageable at 3-5 percent, NPLs for the banking system as a whole remain higher at 14 percent, reflecting mainly the weak financial position of the state-owned banks.26 The authorities responded that, after tightening regulations in the wake of the Asian crisis, they had turned their attention to improving the quality of the loan portfolios for state-owned banks by pursuing delinquent borrowers more aggressively. The staff stressed the importance of continued vigilance in the current environment of still rapid private sector credit growth, as even a small bank failure 24 Myanmar is a participant in the Association of South East Asian Nation’s (ASEAN) Common Effective Preferential Tariff Scheme (CEPT). Current tariff levels range from O-40 percent, and are scheduled to be reduced to a uniform rate of 5 percent by 2008. Myanmar’s rating under the IMF’s trade restrictiveness index is currently a 7 (with 10 being most restrictive), broadly consistent with other low-income countries in the region (ranging from Vietnam’s rating of 9 to Cambodia’s rating of 6). 25 Exchange restrictions arise from (i) limits on purchases of foreign exchange by residents for foreign travel; (ii) prior approval requirements on the remittable portion of wages of nonresidents; (iii) monthly limits on conversion of FECs for payments and transfers relating to invisible and other current international transactions. A multiple currency practice arises from the divergence between the exchange rate for official transactions and the FEC rate. 26 Non performing loans are classified as either “substandard”, “doubttW, or “bad”, when principal or interest payments are overdue 6-12 months, 12-24 months, or above 24 months, respectively. This classification is not in line with international standards, and the reliability of the data is in doubt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- in Myanmar’s nascent financial sector could have disproportionate confidence effects and engender systemic problems. 27. The authorities recently passed the Control of Money Laundering Law. The staff welcomed this development and urged the authorities to vigorously implement the law, while taking care to design the supporting regulations in a manner that will not impede legitimate business activities or cause instability in financial markets. The authorities agreed, and requested assistance in designing such regulations. 28. The availability of timely and reliable statistical data are crucial in informing policy- making and in improving the credibility of the reform effort. Time lags, valuation problems, and coverage and consistency issues constitute major weaknesses in the available macroeconomic data. In addition, public access to some key economic reports (such as the budget, and the Planning Ministry’s Annual Review of financial, economic, and social conditions) remains restricted. The staff stressed the key role of timely and reliable economic data in underpinning policy analysis, and noted that the resumption of publication of the budget and the government’s annual economic and financial report would help demonstrate the authorities’ commitment to transparency. Progress in this area could also positively impact the credibility of the reform effort. The authorities responded that they are making efforts to enhance their record on transparency, and requested technical assistance for improving their economic statistics. C. Medium Term Prospects 29. Under current policies, medium-term prospects are bleak, leaving the economy vulnerable to adverse shocks. The staff presented the authorities with a baseline scenario, under which growth is likely to slow significantly, constrained by low agricultural output due to the inadequacy of fertilizer imports, and reduced exports in the wake of the restrictions recently imposed on foreign trading companies (Table 6). In the absence of a clearly defined strategy for attaining budget balance, the fiscal position will continue to worsen, keeping inflation high, while investment by the private sector will be gradually crowded out by public sector financing needs, The external position will remain precarious, with the current account in significant deficit, and foreign direct investment and other capital inflows at minimal levels. The import cover of reserves will deteriorate even as arrears continue to grow. Should an adverse shock occur in such an environment, the room for policy maneuver to mitigate the impact of such a disturbance will be extremely limited. 30. Adoption of economic reform measures could significantly improve Myanmar’s medium-term prospects and help reduce vulnerability. The staff also shared with the authorities an alternative scenario that reflects the positive impact of undertaking reforms. Structural reforms, including allowing private sector exports of high quality rice, and exposing SEES to hard budget constraints while bringing them gradually onto the parallel market exchange rate, would boost growth through supply and efficiency effects (Table 7). A stronger revenue effort, along with better control of expenditures, would bring down the overall public sector deficit in a manner consistent with the authorities’ medium-term target of budget balance. Lower Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- public sector financing requirements would reduce inflation, allow for healthy private sector credit growth, and create room for fiscal policy to respond to adverse shocks. External vulnerability would be reduced, as reform measures generated stronger exports and attracted capital inflows. This reform scenario does not assume additional external financing; benefits from such financing would further improve the outlook under reforms. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 31. The current policy mix is unsustainable, and the economic outlook is grim. Myanmar’s high growth potential has long been held back by economic mismanagement, as evidenced by the growing gap in income and living standards between Myanmar and many other countries in the region. The cumulative effect of the policy environment, particularly on human development outcomes, is evident. Ad hoc policies do not tackle the underlying problems, and thus are likely to further erode investor confidence, foster uncertainty, and ensure that private economic activity in the formal sector remains stunted. For example, the suspension of import and export licenses for foreign trading firms will likely hurt the heretofore dynamic pulses and beans sector. 32. The need for reforms has increased in urgency, as recent developments have highlighted the grave risks posed by imprudent policies. In particular, the risks have recently been manifested in the rising inflation rate, which threatens to escalate further, and the sharp decline in the value of the kyat in the parallel exchange market. Without some steps taken to correct the underlying imbalances, there is little scope for these pressures to abate on their own, and the deteriorating economic situation could come to threaten macroeconomic and social stability. 33. Comprehensive reform is clearly needed to restore a sustainable policy mix and unlock Myanmar’s growth potential. Strong measures, resolutely implemented, are needed to break from the low-level income path, improve investor confidence, and foster sustained economic growth. Such reforms encompass both macroeconomic and structural elements, and would deliver the best results if implemented in tandem. In addition, such measures would help Myanmar make progress towards clearing its external arrears and normalizing relations with its creditors. l Fiscal reforms must take the lead to bring about macroeconomic stability. Fiscal deficits are at the root of the current macroeconomic imbalances. The authorities’ intention to balance the budget over the medium-term is thus welcome, although the absence of a well-defined strategy to achieve this target is a matter for concern. How the deficit reduction is achieved is crucial; government expenditures need to be reoriented toward quality social spending, and more revenues should be mobilized through tax policy reforms. 0 Exchange rate unification remains a key priority. Removing distortions inherent in the current dual exchange rate system will help improve resource allocation and set the stage Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- l l l 34. for sustained growth. The potentially adverse short-run impacts of unification can be alleviated by implementation in tandem with other reforms, including control of the public sector deficit, and structural measures such as agricultural, state enterprise, and trade reforms. Operational independence for the central bank is needed for the effective conduct of monetary policy. At the very least, automatic access to deficit financing from the central bank should be eliminated. Interest rates need to be more flexible to encourage financial deepening, an important contributor to growth. The State Economic Enterprises should be reformed. The drain on the budget and the distortions in the economy arising from these enterprises are a drag on growth. These enterprises should be run on a more commercial basis, including through transacting at FEC rates, and, ultimately, privatized. A first step would be to make explicit the implicit taxes and subsidies that are currently in place in order to reveal the SEES’ true financial position. This would allow the imposition of hard budget constraints. Agricultural policies need revamping. In particular, restrictions on private sector exports of agricultural products, including rice, should be removed. The successful experience with export liberalization of pulses and beans provides a vivid illustration of the strong supply response that can be generated, and the potential for higher export earnings. While the scope of the required reform agenda appears daunting, modest yet mutually complementary actions can be taken in the short run which could have significant beneficial effects and build momentum for deeper reforms. Given the financing constraints and the limited implementation capacity, some initial steps (as outlined below) that do not require external financing can be adopted with minimal disruption. However, the benefits of these reforms will be greatly enhanced if they are executed within the framework of a well-articulated medium- term strategy. Such actions would also send a strong signal of the authorities’ commitment to reform and help set the stage for more involvement by the official community in Myanmar’s economic development. l Fiscal reform: Revenues can be considerably enhanced within the current tax structure through the elimination of exemptions and loopholes, better tax administration, and valuation of imports at market exchange rates. l Exchange rate unification and SEE reform: Exchange rate unification could proceed gradually by sequentially matching importing and exporting SEES according to their foreign exchange transactions, and shifting these transactions to the parallel market exchange rate. At the same time, implicit taxes and subsidies, such as in the rice procurement system, should be replaced with more explicit counterparts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - l Liberalization of agricultural exports: Allowing private exports of high-quality varieties of rice would induce a strong supply response, generate foreign exchange earnings that would facilitate imports of crucial inputs, and mobilize support for broader reforms. 35. Continued vigilance of financial institutions will be important as the financial system develops further. The authorities have tightened practices in banking supervision since the Asian crisis, and efforts to improve the financial position of state-owned banks are commendable. The current environment of rapid credit growth warrants careful monitoring to ensure the soundness and stability of the financial system. Measures to combat money laundering are also welcome and should be implemented vigorously, but in a transparent manner and without unduly disrupting legitimate business activities.27 36. Ad hoc administrative measures significantly hamper trade. These measures run counter to the authorities’ commitment in international fora to liberalize trade, and provide incentives for corruption. Since the dual exchange rate system is driving the need for such restrictions, trade reforms should ideally be undertaken in tandem with other reforms, including exchange rate unification. Myanmar maintains restrictions and multiple currency practices that are subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VIII. In view of the absence of a clear timetable for their elimination, the staff does not recommend their approval. 37. Improvements in the collection and dissemination of economic statistics are an important priority. Macroeconomic statistics pertaining to most sectors suffer from numerous deficiencies, reducing their information content and hampering policy analysis. The staff urges the authorities to signal their commitment to the reform process by initiating measures to improve data collection and by resuming publication of the budget and the Annual Review of economic, financial, and social conditions. Public dissemination of timely and reliable statistics would also lend more credibility to the reform process. Such efforts, if undertaken along with demonstrated implementation of past technical assistance, could pave the way for resumption of Fund technical assistance. 38. It is recommended that the next consultation with Myanmar be held on the standard 12-month cycle. 27 Myanmar was added to the Financial Action Task Force’s list of non-cooperative countries in the area of anti-money laundering in September 2001, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Chart 1 MYANMAR Selected Economic Indicators, 1991/92-2001/02 Output growth (by official estimates) slowed in 2001/02, but was still robust. Selected indicators, however, call into question the aggregate developments. 16 16 14 12 Real GDP and Agriculture (in percent change) 14 i 10 111 12 IO 6 50 Output of Selected Sectors 40 _ (in percent change) Electricity 10 usage, 5 \ ’ ’ production, left -30 -40 L _________ -10 96197 9,198 98199 99100 OO/Ol 01/O* . . . financed mostly by central bank credit, as commercial bank financing has declined. The fiscal deficit rose sharply in 2000/01, and remains large . . . , 6 Public Sector Deficit (in percent of GDP) 10 10 Domestic Bank Financing 9 (in percent of GDP) i 9 8 q commsrclal banks b 7 n Central bd 1-J 6 J 6 5 5 4 3 1 4 13 2 1 1 2 1 0 0 -1 ’ ’ -1 95196 96197 97/98 98199 99100 OO/Ol 01102 Thepublic sectorftnancing requirements have . . . driving a surge in injlation and turning real boosted growth of monetary aggregates, interest rates negative. 80 Inflation and Nominal Interest Rates 70 p (in percent) 60 60 Broad Money I (In percent contribution to broad money growth) I 1 50 Broad Money (12~mo percent chanee1 8. . 50 -change, left axis) Depo: (right Claims on private sector Jan-96 Sep.96 May-97 Jm-98 scp-98 Msy-99 Jan-00 Sep.00 May-01 Jan-02 -10 '" 8'0 Ian-96 Sep.96 May-97 Jan-98 Sep.98 May-99 Jan-00 Sep-00 May-O, Jan-02 Sources: Data provided by Myanmar authorities; and IFS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Chart 2 MYANMAR Selected External Indicators, 1991/92-2001/02 . . . as gas exports boosted total exports in OO/Ol but have since leveled off: 4000 , Exports and Imports of Goods The current account switched back into deficit in OUO2 following a small surplus in 00/0X . . . 1200 r -- 1200 Current Account Deficit I/ 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 0 3500 3000 (in millions ofU.S. dollars) 2500 1000 500 0 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 OOiOl 01102 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 0 L 1000 800 600 400 200 0 -200 -400 III millions of U.S. dollars) -400 L--- 91,92 92193 9,194 941% 95/96 96/W 9,198 98/B 99ml 00/01 OliO2 However, tourist arrivals have dropped precipitously . . . . . . and inflows from abroad are declining, as foreign investment has fallen to minimal levels. Foreign Direct Investment (in millions of U.S. dollars) ,500 3000 2500 400 350 300 250 200 I50 100 50 0 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 Tourist Arrivals (in thousands of visitors) From EU, US and Canada L 91/92 92/93 93194 94195 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 OO/Ol 01102 .I. while the net reserveposition is still weak (short- term borrowing has boosted gross reserves). 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 OOiOl 01/02 The FEC rate plummeted in 2001, and continues to slide . . . 0 100 200 300 400 so0 600 700 800 900 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 Oftidal Reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 600 ~ r I- ,- t Exchange Rates 21 140 120 100 80 60 (Effective exchange rates, 1996=100) JFEC rate (left axis) Kyat per U.S. dollar 400 300 200 100 ‘0 h-96 Sep.96 May-97 h-98 Srp-98 May-99 k-00 S+N May-O, Jan-02 Sources: Data provided by Myanmar authorities; and IFS. li At official exchange rates. 21 Effective exchange rates are constructed as a weighted average of the official rate (30 percent) and the FEC rate (70 percent). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23- Table 1. Myanmar: Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2002/03 l/ GDP (200 1102): US$7.7 billion 21 Population (1999/00): 50.1 million Quota: SDR 258.4 million 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 2001102 2002103 Prov. Est. Est. Proj GDP (in billions of kyats) 1,128 Real sector Real GDP Fixed Investment Consumer prices (period average) Consumer prices (end of period) 5.7 8.0 33.9 45.1 Public sector 31 Total revenue (including grants) Total expenditure Overall balance o/w: State Economic Enterprises Domestic bank financing Domestic public debt 7.8 12.9 -5.1 -4.2 4.0 23.1 Money and credit Broad money Domestic credit Public sector (net) Private sector Velocity of broad money Interest rates (in percent, end of period) Central Bank rate 28.7 28.5 20.4 50.9 3.4 15.0 Balance of payments Trade balance Exports Imports Current account balance (excl. grants) Overall balance Gross official reserves In millions of U.S. dollars In months of total imports External debt Total external debt (including arrears) (in percent of GDP) 21 External debt arrears Terms of trade (in percent change) Exchange rates (end of period) Official exchange rate (kyats per U.S. dollar) FEC (parallel) rate (kyats per U.S. dollar) 1,615 2,195 2,558 3,524 (in percent change; unless otherwise indicated) 5.8 10.9 13.7 10.5 16.5 11.0 11.2 23.7 49.1 10.9 -1.7 34.5 33.7 4.9 3.8 53.8 (in percent of GDP) 7.2 5.4 5.3 4.2 13.0 9.8 13.6 9.1 -5.7 -4.5 -8.3 -4.9 -5.3 -3.2 -5.0 -1.4 3.5 5.3 7.0 6.9 20.8 20.0 24.9 22.9 (in annual percent change) 27.6 31.4 47.4 43.2 27.2 30.7 44.7 36.6 21.3 36.5 41.1 26.6 40.3 19.5 52.7 56.9 3.8 4.0 3.3 3.2 12.0 12.0 10.0 10.0 (in millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) -1,298 -1,588 -1,252 124 -443 -398 1,011 1,113 1,353 2,443 2,293 2,560 -2,309 -2,702 -2,605 -2,319 -2,736 -2,958 -850 -1,029 -818 146 -541 -525 -132 -275 -386 -254 18 -307 331 395 343 269 524 500 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.4 2.3 2.0 5,257 5,666 6,038 5,936 6,042 6,093 79.3 81.5 65.1 60.7 78.7 71.9 1,636 1,975 2,309 2,486 2,525 2,808 -7 30 22 3 -28 6.4 6.3 6.4 6.7 6.9 243 324 330 451 765 5,462 5.5 1.9 46.9 40.0 4.0 8.9 -4.9 -2.5 4.9 19.7 43.4 45.2 35.4 61.1 3.4 10.0 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities, and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fiscal year (April-March). 21 Officially reported GDP converted at a weighted exchange rate (with 30 percent weight on the official rate, and 70 percent on the FEC rate). 31 Consolidated public sector; includes the Union Government and nonfinancial state enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. Myanmar: Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector, 1999/00-2002103 1999100 2000101 2001102 2002103 2002103 Prov. Budget Staff Est. (In billions of kyats) Union Government Receipts Tax revenue Transfers from SEES Other nontax revenue Foreign grants I/ Expenditures 145.2 220.8 270.9 241.6 348.1 Current expenditures 84.7 133.9 172.3 157.8 220.4 Wages/Salaries 8.2 49.7 51.2 51.5 51.5 Goods and services 22.6 24.8 26.6 25.8 38.2 Mantainance and repairs 21.3 23.6 28.2 23.6 36.5 Contributions 14.8 4.7 24.3 12.0 38.2 Interest payments: 17.8 24.6 33.7 36.8 47.7 Domestic 17.7 24.4 33.4 36.5 47.3 External (due) l/ 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 Other 0.0 6.5 8.4 8.2 8.2 Capital expenditures 21 60.5 86.9 98.5 83.8 127.7 Current Balance 33.3 1.2 -22.9 25.8 -2.7 Overall Balance -27.2 -85.7 121.4 -57.9 -130.4 State Economic Enterprises Receipts Expenditures Current Capital Current Balance -50.0 -105.5 -13.5 -23.9 -88.0 Overall Balance -71.0 -127.3 -50.9 -60.0 -136.5 Consolidated Accounts Receipts Tax Non-tax Grants l/ Expenditures 216.2 348.2 321.8 301.6 484.7 Current 134.7 239.4 185.8 181.7 308.4 Capital 81.5 108.8 136.0 119.9 176.3 Current Balance -16.7 -104.3 -36.4 1.9 -90.7 Overall Balance -98.2 -213.1 -172.3 -118.0 -266.9 118.0 135.1 149.5 183.6 217.7 55.3 70.1 74.9 99.1 116.9 44.4 41.1 43.2 59.6 70.3 17.8 23.6 30.8 24.5 30.0 0.5 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.6 315.5 284.4 404.9 414.8 573.5 386.5 411.7 455.8 474.8 710.0 365.5 389.8 418.3 438.6 661.5 21.0 21.9 37.4 36.2 48.5 118.0 135.1 149.5 183.6 217.7 55.3 70.1 74.9 99.1 116.9 62.2 64.7 74.0 84.1 100.3 0.5 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2.5 - Table 2 (concluded). Myanmar: Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector, 1999/00-2002/03 19 99100 200010 1 200 1102 2002103 2002103 Prov. Budget Staff Est. Financing 98.2 Foreign financing. 0.7 Foreign loans (net on accrual basis) li -1.4 Disbursements 0.8 Amortization due -2.2 Change in external arrears li 2.1 Interest 0.5 Principal 1.6 Domestic financing 97.5 Bank financing 116.6 Central Bank credit 62.6 Other 31 54.0 Other -19.1 Consolidated Accounts Rcccipts: Of which: Tax revenue Total expenditures Current cxpcnditures Current account balance Capital expenditure Overall balance Of which: Bank financing Defense expenditure Social sector spending excluding pensions 5.4 2.5 9.8 6.1 -0.8 3.7 -4.5 5.3 1.7 0.8 1.5 1.3 1.0 (In billions of kyats) 213.1 172.3 118.0 -0.8 -1.1 0.0 -1.9 -1.3 -1.9 0.1 0.5 0.3 -2.0 -1.9 -2.1 1.1 0.3 1.9 0.1 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.3 1.6 213.8 173.4 118.0 178.6 243.5 118.0 139.9 258.4 38.6 -14.9 . 35.3 -70.1 0.0 (In pcrccnt of GDP) 5.3 4.2 4.0 2.7 2.1 2.1 13.6 9.1 6.5 9.4 5.3 3.9 -4.1 -1.0 0.0 4.3 3.9 2.6 -8.3 -4.9 -2.5 7.0 6.9 2.5 2.5 1.8 1.1 266.9 0.0 -1.9 0.3 -2.1 1.9 0.3 1.6 266.9 266.9 . 0.0 4.0 2.1 8.9 5.6 -1.7 3.2 -4.9 4.9 1.4 1.0 (In percent of total Union Government expenditure) Defcnsc expenditure Social sector spending excluding pensions 26.2 28.7 23.9 21.6 22.0 11.4 17.9 16.7 18.8 16.2 Sources: Budget Department, Ministry of Finance and Revenue; and staff estimates. l/ Valued at the official exchange rate. 2/ Includes net lending. 3/ Includes purchase of Treasury Bonds by commercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Myanmar: Balance of Payments, 1997/98-2002103 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 2001102 2002103 Est. Proj . Trade balance -1,298 -1,588 -1,252 124 -443 -398 Exports, mainlyjYo. b. 1,011 1,113 1,353 2,443 2,293 2,560 Imports, mainly c.i.$ -2,309 -2,702 -2,605 -2,319 -2,736 -2,958 of which: border trade -250 -242 -221 -191 -118 -136 Services, net Receipts Payments ofwhich: interest due -17 70 118 -181 -307 -349 554 678 573 510 463 481 -571 -608 -455 -691 -769 -829 -65 -104 -99 -79 -71 -62 Private transfers, net 465 490 316 203 209 221 Current account, excl. grants -850 -1,029 -818 146 -541 -525 Official grants 259 91 35 37 74 87 Nonmonetary capital movements 375 567 36 -97 -15 -49 Long-term, net Disbursements Repayments due Foreign Direct Investment Other capital, net -44 -23 -265 -303 -198 -232 171 321 80 17 82 84 -215 -343 -345 -320 -280 -316 421 592 304 208 186 186 -2 -3 -3 -2 -2 -2 Errors and omissions, net 85 95 361 -340 500 180 Overall balance -132 -275 -386 -254 18 -307 Financing 132 275 386 254 -18 307 Net International Reserves (- increase) -43 -64 52 78 -57 24 Gross reserves (- increase) -44 -64 52 75 -255 24 Short-term liabilities 0 0 0 3 199 0 Net increase in arrears 175 339 334 176 39 283 Memorandum items: Current account balance (in percent of GDP l/) 2/ Gross reserves, end-period (in months of imports) Net reserves, end-period Total external debt (in percent of GDP l/) 3/ (as ratio to exports of goods and non factor services) External debt arrears 4/ External debt service (in percent of exports of GNFS) Broad money (as ratio to gross reserves) Terms of trade (in percent change) -12.8 -14.8 -8.8 1.5 -7.0 331 395 343 269 524 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.4 2.3 232 296 244 167 223 5,257 5,666 6,038 5,936 6,042 79.3 81.5 65.1 60.7 78.7 3.4 3.2 3.2 2.0 2.2 1,636 1,975 2,309 2,486 2,525 18.0 25.2 23.5 13.7 12.9 7.5 5.5 6.2 11.4 5.5 (7.4) 29.8 21.8 2.8 (28.0) -6.2 500 2.0 200 6,093 71.9 2.0 2,808 12.6 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Based on officially recorded GDP, converted at weighted exchange rate. 2/ Excluding grants. 3/ The decline in the debt ratio in 1999/00 is due to the high nominal GDP growth during that year. 4/ Includes valuation adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-Ll- Table 4. Myanmar: External Debt and Arrears, 1997/98-2001/02 1/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 2001/02 External Debt Total 21 Bilateral Of which: Japan Germany Multilateral Of which: IDA AsDB Suppliers’ credit Commercial banks Short-term 3/ 5,257 5,667 6,038 5,936 6,042 2,903 3,063 3,300 3,341 3,062 2,192 2,306 2,607 2,576 2,305 460 483 399 337 349 1,086 1,096 1,091 1,063 1,064 327 742 742 719 719 732 328 328 325 325 367 468 487 427 522 414 463 507 437 527 488 577 653 668 868 Stock of arrears Total 1,636 1,975 2,309 2,486 2,525 Principal 1,247 1,498 1,756 1,920 1,958 Interest 389 477 553 566 567 Bilateral 3/ 1,143 1,404 1,708 1,848 1,853 Principal 887 1,085 1,325 1,468 1,477 Interest 256 319 383 380 376 Private creditors 3/ 479 522 514 509 502 Principal 350 379 372 364 362 Interest 129 142 141 145 140 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ End of period. Includes valuation adjustments. 2/ Excludes syndicated loans for Yedana and Yetagun gas projects (amounting to approximately $370 million by 1999/00). 31 Includes supplier’s credit. Figures may not be consistent with the balance of payments due to lags in recording payments and valuation adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Myanmar: Monetary Authorities’ Accounts and Monetary Survey, 1998-2002 (In millions of kyats, end of period) 1998 1999 2000 Mar. Mar. Mar. Mar. 2001 2002 Jun. Sep. Dec. Mar. Monetary Authorities’ Accounts Foreign assets l! 2,137 3,420 2,138 1,708 2,037 3,739 4,149 Foreign liabilities 2,160 2,093 2,099 2,633 2,092 3,420 3,551 Domestic credit (net) 270,837 324,003 389,160 556,913 624,087 643,662 696,616 Claims on central government (net) 252,942 304,152 366,765 506,688 570,772 623,054 675,040 Claims on deposit money banks 17.895 19,85 1 22,395 50,225 53,315 20,608 21,576 Other items (net) 1,443 -359 538 10,653 -7,881 -13,533 -19,641 Of which: Capital accounts -2,882 -4,876 -5,285 -8,952 -8,952 -8,952 -8,952 Reserve money 249,337 300,778 366,708 543,994 593,143 607,072 653,723 Other (nonreserve) liabilities to deposit money banks 22,935 24,196 23,032 22,647 23,009 23,377 23,850 23,765 4,073 3,506 729,257 666,519 62,738 73,614 -10,083 779,673 Monetary survey Net foreign assets -10,309 -9,255 -10,588 -11,726 -10,929 -10,645 -10,384 -9,806 Domestic credit 382,133 485,940 634,891 918,708 1,022,920 1,108,397 1,204,539 1,254,992 Claims on public sector (net) 263,402 3 19,375 435,879 614,841 679,822 735,661 787,863 778,092 Claims on private sector 118,731 166,565 199,012 303,867 343,098 372,736 416,676 476,900 Other items (net) -2,714 -5,837 -5,821 4,532 -23,423 -25,300 -42,442 59,910 Broad money (at official exchange rate) 369,124 470,852 618,484 911,515 988,569 1,072,454 1,151,713 1,305,097 Narrow money 259,121 307,523 382,573 559,625 608,035 654,322 701,153 839,490 Quasi-money 110,003 163,329 235,911 351,890 380,534 418,132 450,560 465,607 Total deposits 145,417 210,692 318,141 491,456 537,743 594,118 656,909 696,945 (Annual percent change) Domestic credit 28.5 27.2 30.7 44.7 49.3 46.3 47.0 36.6 Claims on public sector (net) 20.4 21.3 36.5 41.1 45.0 43.3 42.6 26.6 Claims on private sector 50.9 40.3 19.5 52.7 58.8 52.6 56.1 56.9 Broad money (at official exchange rate) 28.7 27.6 31.4 47.4 49.1 44.3 43.9 43.2 Narrow money 30.6 18.7 24.4 46.3 50.5 50.4 50.8 50.0 Quasi-money 24.5 48.5 44.4 49.2 46.8 35.7 34.3 32.3 Reserve money 20.2 20.6 21.9 48.3 55.0 49.9 51.6 43.3 Total deposits 31.1 44.9 51.0 54.5 51.4 41.0 44.3 41.8 Sources: Central Bank of Myanmar; and staff estimates. l/ Comprises accounts of the Central Bank of Myanmar and the short-term foreign assets of the Myanmar Foreign Trade Bank, with a contra-entry in Other (nonreserve) liabilities to deposit money banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 6. Myanmar: Medium-Term Scenario, 1999/00-2006/07 l/ 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006107 Proj. Proj. Proj Proj. Proj GDP (in constant prices) Agriculture 2/ Industrial production 3/ Services and trade Inflation (CPI, period average) Public Finances 10.9 11.5 13.8 9.2 10.9 Total revenue (including grants) Total expenditure Overall balance Estimated domestic public debt 4/ Estimated total public debt 5/ Money and Credit Broad money Public sector credit (net) Private sector credit Balance of Payments 5.4 9.8 -4.5 20.0 85.1 31.4 36.5 19.5 13.7 10.5 5.5 5.1 4.3 3.7 12.4 7.2 5.7 4.7 4.0 3.5 18.0 17.2 6.0 5.5 4.7 4.0 13.4 14.0 5.0 5.5 4.6 4.0 -1.7 34.5 46.9 40.0 43.0 47.0 (In percent of GDP) 5.3 4.2 4.0 3.9 3.9 3.8 13.6 9.1 8.9 9.2 9.6 9.9 -8.3 -4.9 -4.9 -5.2 -5.7 -6.1 24.9 22.9 19.7 18.6 18.2 18.0 85.6 101.6 91.6 88.2 86.4 85.2 (In percent change) 47.4 43.2 43.4 44.0 45.7 53.6 41.1 26.6 35.4 40.0 46.3 51.6 52.7 56.9 61.1 52.4 46.9 57.6 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 2.9 2.8 3.0 3.0 50.0 3.7 10.3 -6.6 18.3 85.0 54.8 56.8 53.4 Exports (in percent change) Imports (in percent change) Trade balance (in percent of GDP) 5/ Current account (excluding grants) (in percent of GDP) 5/ 21.6 -3.6 ,I ,252 -13.5 -818 -8.8 35 80.5 -6.1 11.6 13.0 13.1 11.3 -11.0 18.0 8.1 10.2 10.7 10.2 124 -443 -398 -367 -337 -335 1.3 -5.8 -4.7 -4.1 -3.6 -3.5 146 -541 -525 -45 1 -439 -430 1.5 -7.0 -6.2 -5.1 -4.7 -4.5 37 74 87 92 98 104 -97 -15 -49 -29 25 62 -303 -198 -232 -213 -157 -120 208 186 186 186 186 186 -340 500 180 0 0 0 -254 18 -307 -387 -316 -264 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 9.6 8.9 -341 -3.5 -424 -4.3 Grants 110 Capital account 36 of which : Long-km Capital (net) -265 FDI 304 Errors and omissions 361 81 -101 186 0 Overall balance -386 -233 External Debt and Reserves Total external debt (including arrears) 6,038 5,936 6,042 6,093 6,194 6,319 6,449 6,579 (in percent of GDP) 5/ 65.1 60.7 78.7 71.9 69.5 68.2 67.2 66.8 External debt arrears 2,309 2,486 2,525 2,808 3,122 3,404 3,654 3,885 Gross official reserves 343 269 524 500 427 393 378 376 (in months of total imports) 1.6 1.4 2.3 2.0 1.6 1.3 1.1 1.0 Source: Data from Myanma authorities, with adjustments made by IMF staff. l/ The medium-term scenario was projected based on the following exchange rate assumption: the official exchange rate was assumed fixed at current levels, and the parallel market rate moved such that the real parallel market exchange rate was constant. The nominal weighted exchange rate was then calculated in the same manner as in footnote 5. 2/ Including livestock, fishery and forestry. 3/ Including manufacturing, power, energy, construction and mining. 4/ The decline in the public debt ratio in 2001/02 and future years is an artifact of high nominal GDP growth due to high inflation. 5/ Official GDP valued at the weighted exchange rate (with a 30 percent weight on the official rate and 70 percent on the FEC rate). (In percent change) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 7. Myanmar: Policy Reform Scenario, 1999/00-2006/07 1999100 2000101 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004105 2005/06 2006/07 Proj Proj . Proj Proj. Proj GDP (in constant prices) Agriculture l! Industrial production 21 Services and trade Inflation (CPI, period average) Public Finances 10.9 11.5 13.8 9.2 10.9 Total revenue (including grants) Total expenditure Overall balance Estimated domestic public debt Estimated total public debt 4/ Money and Credit Broad money Public sector credit (net) Private sector credit 5.4 9.8 -4.5 20.0 85.1 31.4 36.5 19.5 Balance of Payments Exports (in percent change) 21.6 Imports (in percent change) -3.6 Trade balance -1,252 (in percent of GDP) 3/ -13.5 Current account (excluding grants) -818 (in percent of GDP) 3/ -8.8 Grants 35 Capital account 36 of which : Long-term capital (net) -26.5 FDI 304 Errors and omissions 361 Overall balance -386 External Debt and Reserves Total external debt (including arrears) 6,038 5,936 6,042 6,036 6,039 6,014 6,001 5,950 (in percent of GDP) 3/ 65.1 60.7 78.7 69.6 65.2 60.7 56.2 51.6 External debt arrears 2,309 2,486 2,525 2,751 2,967 3,099 3,206 3,256 Gross official reserves 343 269 524 584 698 842 1,073 1,370 (in months of total imports) 1.6 1.4 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.4 2.7 3.1 (In percent change) 13.7 10.5 6.2 6.6 7.0 7.6 12.4 7.2 7.0 7.0 7.4 8.0 18.0 17.2 6.0 6.0 6.5 7.0 13.4 14.0 5.0 6.0 6.5 7.0 -1.7 34.5 36.9 17.5 15.0 12.5 (In percent of GDP) 5.3 4.2 4.0 4.2 4.8 5.3 13.6 9.1 8.0 7.4 6.9 6.3 -8.3 -4.9 -4.1 -3.2 -2.1 -1.0 24.9 22.9 19.9 19.1 17.6 15.6 85.6 101.6 89.5 84.3 78.3 71.8 (In percent change) 47.4 43.2 32.4 26.4 23.1 20.0 41.1 26.6 26.9 21.0 14.1 7.3 52.7 56.9 44.9 36.0 35.7 34.2 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 80.5 -6.1 25.0 19.0 14.0 13.0 -11.0 18.0 19.0 15.0 13.0 12.5 124 -443 -389 -333 -342 -365 1.3 -5.8 -4.5 -3.6 -3.4 -3.4 146 -541 -459 -33 1 -321 -305 1.5 -7.0 -5.3 -3.6 -3.2 -2.9 37 74 87 92 98 104 -97 -15 26 137 236 325 -303 -198 -232 -213 -157 -120 208 186 260 352 397 449 -340 500 180 0 0 0 -254 18 -167 -102 13 123 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 8.0 8.5 7.3 7.2 10.0 5.5 5.7 -0.3 13.4 65.0 17.7 2.1 31.5 12.0 11.0 -361 -3.1 -260 -2.3 110 397 -101 503 0 248 Source: Data from Myanma authorities, with adjustments made by IMF staff. 1/ Including livestock, fishery and forestry. 2/ Including manufacturing, power, energy, construction and mining. 3/ Official GDP valued at the weighted exchange rate (with a 30 percent weight on the official rate and 70 percent on the FEC rate). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Myanmar: Social Indicators ANNEX I Latest single year 1970-75 1980-85 1993-2002 Same region/income group East Asia & Low- Pacific income POPULATION Total population, mid-year (millions) Growth rate (percent annual average) Urban population (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) 30.4 37.5 50.1 1,855.2 2,459.g 2.3 2.1 1.2 1.0 1.9 23.9 24.0 27.3 33.9 30.5 5.8 4.6 3.1 2.1 3.6 POVERTY (percent of population) National headcount index . . . 22.9 28.5 INCOME Consumer price index (1995=100) Food price index (1995=100) 8 13 270.2 134.5 . 11 281.7 SOCIAL INDICATORS Public expenditure Health (percent of GDP) . Education (percent of GDP) 1.7 2.0 Net primary school enrollment rate (percent of age group) Total Male Female 63 77 80 99 86 65 78 80 99 89 61 75 80 99 82 Access to safe water (percent of population) Total Urban Rural . . . 27 72 75 76 . 36 89 93 88 21 66 66 70 Access to health care Population per physician (persons) Immunization (percent under 12 months) Measles DPT . Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) 16 . 38 Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female 50 53 56 69 59 48 51 54 67 58 51 54 59 71 64 Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (1559) Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 122 179 . 106 89 36 76 134 126 45 115 384 357 313 262 . 230 140.1 0.3 2.01 1.3 1.0 2.9 3.2 3,333 595 87 85 93 85 36 10 57 57 183 294 132 261 . Source: 2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank. Myanmar. Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (2000). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX II Myanmar-Statistical Issues Myanmar compiles a range of economic and social statistics. The Central Bank of Myanmar :bBM) reports a number of core statistics to the Fund on a monthly basis (attached table) and provides more comprehensive data for the Article IV consultation missions.’ However, although there have been recent improvements in the quality of statistics, particularly in the monetary area, data shortcomings continue to hinder the monitoring of economic developments and the assessment of policy proposals. In addition, dissemination has been limited. National accounts 2. National accounts statistics are available only on an annual basis and revisions are typically not issued before a new year starts. Private sector transactions are underestimated, as all informal sector activities are excluded. The use of the highly overvalued official exchange rate for conversion purposes results in understatement of external trade and the foreign exchange content of consumption, government expenditures, and investment. The base year for GDP in constant prices has been revised to 1995/96, but not all data has yet been made available, and there may be some problems with the revisions. Substantive changes in relative prices since price liberalization complicate the interpretation of GDP deflators. Price indices 3. The authorities have begun to publish a new index in which the base year has been changed from 1986 to 1997 using new weights derived from the 1997 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. The new CPI comprises 135 consumption items. Its regional coverage is expanded, and the consumption items include wider coverage of items at market prices (rather than at controlled prices) as well as a larger share of imported goods. However, the index remains urban: a price index for rural areas has not yet been compiled. Government finance 4. There is no comprehensive monthly and quarterly compilation of fiscal data. Although a flash report is produced by the CBM on a monthly basis, and the Budget Department prepares every four months a summary report based on provisional information on cash expenditures collected from the ministries; the coverage of these reports is incomplete. Annual comprehensive data are compiled with delays of up to twelve months after the end of the reference year, and expenditure is aggregated following a fimctional classification; expenditures by economic classification is ‘The Central Statistical Organization (CSO) publishes the Statistical Yearbook, which includes a large number of economic, social, and demographic time series; the latest issue was for 2001, and is also available in CD ROM format. The CSO also publishes the bi-monthly SelectedMonthly Economic Indicators, which include monthly data on consumer prices, selected producer prices and output volumes, tourism, transportation, and foreign trade and investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNEX II produced with a longer delay. In addition, only consolidated data for State Economic Enterprises (SEES) are available, and some transactions are recorded partly on an accrual basis and partly on a cash basis. Fiscal and monetary data are not consistent. Budget estimates and actuals tend to differ by wide margins in part because the approved budget allows for little, if any, inflation. 5. Annual data on the operations of the consolidated central government are reported to the Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. The reported data, however, do not include an economic classification of expenditure. In addition, improving debt recording would enhance fiscal transparency. Monetary accounts 6. The CBM compiles and reports a monetary survey with a lag of 3-6 months. This time lag reflects the lack of technological infrastructure for timely collection and processing of data from a geographically widespread bank branch network, and the delay in compiling government accounts at the Myanma Economic Bank, which manages them (rather than the Ministry of Finance and Revenue). 7. The monetary survey compiled by the CBM in its own format covers the central bank and all commercial banks, state-owned and private. However, there exist a number of deviations from the internationally-accepted methodology: (i) net foreign assets approximates net international reserves, rather than net claims on nonresidents; (ii) claims on the government exclude commercial banks’ holdings of 3- and 5-year treasury bonds; (iii) claims on the private sector cover only lending and exclude (still rather small) other types of claims; (iv) narrow money includes currency issued instead of currency outside banks, but the Foreign Exchange Certificates (FECs) outside banks are excluded; and (v) broad money includes foreign-currency-denominated deposits of nonresidents and of the government. 8. The quality of monetary data reported and published in IFS has improved recently, reflecting assistance provided by STA in the context of the 1998 and 1999 Article IV consultation missions. Starting with the July 1999 issue of IFS, coverage of the banking system was expanded to include private commercial banks established since mid-1992, in addition to the CBM and the four state-owned banks (data coverage of private commercial banks begins in June 1992). 9. The quality of monetary statistics could be improved further by: (i) using the market exchange rate, rather than the overvalued official exchange rate, for valuing foreign currency- denominated balance sheet accounts; (ii) reporting on a gross basis all interbank positions and the banks’ claims on the public sector; (iii) booking all debit balances (overdrafts) as claims, and all credit balances as liabilities; (iv) reviewing for consistency the interbank accounts showing positions between the CBM and the commercial banks, including the financial adjustment accounts, and (v) reviewing the recording of the Fund accounts in the CBM’s balance sheet to ensure consistency with standard procedures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX II Balance of payments 10. Balance of payments data have various shortcomings arising from the poor quality of data sources and gaps in coverage of the external transactions of the private sector. The use of the overvalued official exchange rate to convert private sector transactions leads to distortions because these transactions actually take place at or near the market rate. The official trade data exclude military imports, and no adjustment is made for military imports in the balance of payments. Detailed data on services and financial flows are generally not available. There are large discrepancies in the external debt data reported by creditors and debtors. Transactions on arrears are not reported separately. 11. Overall export and import volume and price indices are not fully reported. The export volume and unit value indices computed by the Fund and published in IFS are unsatisfactory and have been discontinued. Data on exports and imports by partner country are reported for calendar years but contain insufficient specification. 12. Technical assistance provided by STA in 1999-2000 has resulted in progress by the CBM in improving its balance of payments compilation system. However, the system is not yet capable of producing reliable and comprehensive data. Progress has been mainly confined to streamlining collection procedures of data from various agencies broadening the classification of external transactions, correction of numerous misclassification in the services component, and compiling data on direct investment income outflows. There have been improvements in the collection of data compiled by commercial banks and data on interest and loan repayments on external debt. No progress has been made, however, in development of the specialized surveys to compile private sector transactions. 13. No progress has been made in improving the dissemination of BOP data within Myanmar. Other problem areas include the measurement of goods for processing, direct investment capital flows, the classification of short-term liabilities of commercial banks, external debt and arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - ANNEX II . 3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- ANNEX III I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Myanmar: Fund Relations (As of August 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined on January 3, 1952; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR million Quota 258.40 Fund holdings of currency 258.40 SDR Department: SDR million Net cumulative allocation 43.47 Holdings 0.30 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Percent of quota 100.0 100.0 Percent of allocation 100.0 0.70 Financial Arrangements: Amount Amount Approval Expiration Approved Drawn Type Date Date (SDR million) (SDR million) Stand-by 6/12/8 1 6/l l/82 27.00 27.00 Stand-by 7128178 7127179 30.00 30.00 Stand-by 5106177 5/05/78 35.00 35.00 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 9/30/00 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Charges/interest 0.0 0.24 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 Total 0.0 0.24 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The kyat has been pegged to the SDR at K 8.5057 per SDR since May 2, 1977. Myanmar applies margins of two percent in respect of spot exchange transactions. Starting in February 1993, the Central Bank of Myanmar started issuing foreign exchange certificates (FECs) at a rate of 1 FEC = US$l. In December 1995, the authorities established FEC exchange centers and allowed market trading of FECs. The FEC traded at K 906 per U.S. dollar in August 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX III VIII. Article IV Consultation: The Executive Board discussed the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation on December 4, 2000. It was proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. IX. Technical Assistance: A substantial program of technical assistance financed by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) was initiated in 1989/90 in the expectation of comprehensive policy reforms. The program foresaw extensive technical assistance supported by training in the areas of bank accounting and supervision; monetary, fiscal, and price statistics; tax and customs administration; public finance; and government financial management. As the anticipated policy reforms did not materialize, the UNDP decided to scale back assistance to Myanmar. As a result, the project on government financial management was canceled in September 1992 and the funding for the remaining projects was reduced. Following the tripartite review of the technical assistance program conducted during the 1993 Article IV consultation discussions, the authorities were informed that it would be difficult to justify an extension of the program and that the ongoing projects would come to an end by the scheduled closing date of December 31, 1993. By that time, 53 person- months of technical assistance and 172 weeks of training had been delivered. Since then technical assistance has continued only in the form of training on a reduced scale. The Article IV consultation missions in 1998-2000 each included a STA economist, who provided technical assistance in the area of monetary (1998) and balance of payments statistics (1999-2000). X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX IV Myanmar: Relations with the World Bank Group’ 1. Myamnar became a member of the World Bank in 1952, IFC in 1956, and IDA in 1962. During 1956661, the Bank made three loans totaling $33.3 million (of which $0.2 million was canceled), all for transportation projects. No lending was requested during 1962-72. Lending was resumed again in 1973 and 30 IDA credits totaling the equivalent of $804 million were committed of which $752.8 million equivalent was disbursed, $92.7 million was canceled, and $64.3 million was repaid. About 26 percent of total lDA/IBRD disbursements were in support of agricultural projects, including irrigation, rubber, livestock, seed development, and grain storage. About 24 percent was for energy sector projects, 16 percent for forestry projects, 17 percent for transportation projects, and the remaining 16 percent for projects in the mining, manufacturing, construction, and telecommunications sectors. 2. There has been no new lending approved since July 1987. The last project closed on December 3 1, 1993. IFC had made no investments in Myamnar. Since September 1998, Myanmar is on a non-accrual status with the Bank and the amount overdue totaled about $93.08 million as of mid-August 2002. 3. Up to the late 198Os, the World Bank provided advice on the formulation and implementation of development policies. Policy recommendations emphasized the need for: fundamental and sustained macroeconomic policy reform, including measures to adjust the exchange rate, price liberalization, especially in agriculture, export promotion and private sector development, and steps to improve the efficiency of state enterprises. During the 1990s the Bank prepared only two economic reports (in 1991 and 1995). Myanmar: IBRD and IDA Lending (As of September 30,2002) (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sector Disbursed IBRD IDA Total Undisbursed Percent Agriculture 0.0 204.1 204.1 26.0 0.0 Energy and Power 0.0 190.0 190.0 24.2 0.0 Forestry 0.0 127.4 127.4 16.2 0.0 Mining 0.0 15.8 15.8 2.0 0.0 Manufacturing 0.0 36.8 36.8 4.7 0.0 Construction industry 0.0 19.8 19.8 2.5 0.0 Transportation 33.1 102.9 136.0 17.3 0.0 Telecommunications 0.0 56.0 56.0 7.1 0.0 Total 33.1 752.8 785.9 100.0 0.0 4. In June 1999, the Bank conducted a technical mission to update its knowledge base about the country at the same time as the Fund’s mission for the Article IV Consultation. The resulting report, which was released under green cover to the government for comment, focuses on poverty and human development, agriculture, private sector development and social services. The previous economic report, Myanmar: Policies for Sustaining Economic Reform, was prepared in November 1994, and was discussed with the government in August 1995. The final report was issued in October 1995. 5. Myamnar Aid Group: The last Consultative Group meeting was held on Jamrary 14, 1986 in Tokyo, under the chairmanship of the World Bank. The aid pledges totaled about $1.0 billion for the subsequent two years. There has been no meeting since then. ‘Prepared by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEXV Myanmar: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ 1. Myanmar joined AsDB in 1973 and operations started the same year. The AsDB has so far provided 32 loans totaling $530.9 million for 28 projects. Ofthese, two loans amounting to $6.6 million were from AsDB’s ordinary capital resources, and 30 loans amounting to $524.3 million were from its Special Fund=s resources. All of the loans to Myamnar have been closed. The AsDB has so far provided technical assistance (TA) totaling $10.7 million for 38 projects. Of these 38 technical assistance projects, 28 were project preparatory and 10 were advisory. 2. AsDB has not processed any new loan or TA project in Myanmar since 1988. However, it sends periodic consultation missions to Myanmar, the most recent of which took place in July 2000. Furthermore, Myamnar is involved in the Program of Economic Cooperation in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS Program). In that capacity, Myanrnar participates in regional meetings and workshops supported by the AsDB’s regional technical assistance. Close coordination is being maintained with the IMF, the World Bank, and the UNDP with particular emphasis being given to assessment of the govemment=s economic reform program and recommended policy actions. Liaison is being maintained with Myanmar=s major bilateral donors regarding the status of their assistance program. Myanmar has not made its loan service payments due to the AsDB since January 15, 1998. As of August 2002, total overdue loan-service payments were equivalent to around $9 1 million. 3. The sectoral distribution of cumulative AsDB lending to Myanmar remains unchanged as shown below: Sector Loans Loans (Number) ($ million) Percent Agriculture & Agro-Industry 15 316.1 59.5 Energy 5 31.8 6.0 Finance & Industry 4 41.4 7.8 Transport & Communications 2 42.5 8.0 Social Infrastructure 6 99.1 18.7 Total 32 530.9 100.0 4. The majority of AsDB assistance has been provided for the development of the agricultural sector. Assistance in sectors other than agriculture has stemmed from an attempt to achieve sectoral balance in lending and to avoid overextending the absorptive capacity of the country=s agricultural executing agencies. To some extent, diversification has also resulted from the govemment=s own desire to proceed with particular projects in various sectors which had already cleared the government approval process, and for which, therefore, priority has been established. ‘Prepared by the staff of the AsDB. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX VI Myanmar: Changes in the Exchange and Trade System’ Payment system Foreign exchange licenses of all private banks were suspended (March 1998). All foreign exchange accounts were transferred to either the Myanmar Foreign Trade Bank or the Myanmar Investment and Commercial Bank. Use of the following currencies is now permitted in border trade: Indian Rupee and Chinese Yuan (November 2000), Thai Baht (January 2001) and Lao Kip (May 2001). Invisible transactions and current transfers The limit on remittances against FECs for payments on invisible transactions and current transfers was reduced from $50,000 to $30,000 a month (1998/99). The limit was further reduced to $20,000 in March 2000, and to $10,000 a month in August 2000. The requirement for each tourist to convert at least $300 into FECs upon arrival was reduced to $200 (July 2000). Import and export systems Imports of all goods not on two lists (A and B) of priority goods were banned (March 1998). Private importers are required to import 80 percent of their imports f?om List A (essential goods) and 20 percent from List B (less essential goods). The number of goods on list B was increased in the first half of 1999. The approval of imports under both Lists A and B also became concurrent (whereas licenses had previously been issued first for List A goods, and only thereafter for List B goods). Imports of various foodstuffs were banned in November 1999 (border trade) and February 2000 (overseas trade), including MSG, soft drinks, fruit, beer, and cigarettes, among others. Private sector exporting of 3 1 key goods (including rice, rubber, and gems) was prohibited (March 1998). For border trade, there is an additional restriction on the private sector export of teak. Private entrepreneurs who carry out reclamation of wetlands were allowed to export 50 percent of their produce (rice and other restricted products except edible oil seeds) The limit is 55 percent for rubber plantations. ‘Changes since the last Article IV consultation are indicated in bold italics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- ANNEX VI Exporters were required to pay in foreign exchange an 8 percent commercial tax (January 1999) in addition to a 2 percent income tax (levied since December 1997). These taxes replaced a 5 percent commercial tax. The practice of automatic issuance of open general import licenses to selected SEES, and joint-ventures that needed to import frequently under the Foreign Investment Law, was replaced by approval by the Ministry of Commerce on a case-by-case basis (1998/99). Foreign trading companies’ licenses to export have been suspended (February 2002). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public